[Venus, Mars, and Moon in Horary]
Venus: 7 in the night. Mars: a participant day and night is the Moon. Table of houses, exaltations, falls, and triplicities of the planets. Day 1901.1. I. 3. 0.n. 174 15 1 Co.n. n. 0.n. 114 0.1 b210.7 1863 1281 15 27 1 19 b21 8 bn. 28 ho. 1 170 15 b 1 ha Dd ba b m X 1170 n.i Dd 120834 Ba 12 11 18/0 227151201 Did De of movable, fixed, and common signs. Four of these signs are said to be movable, namely Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn. And four fixed, namely Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius. The remaining four, namely Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, are common. They are called movable, fixed, or common because when the Sun enters any of them, the time moves, i.e., changes, or is fixed, i.e., perseveres in the same state, or becomes common, i.e., half of that one time will be as half of the other. For example, when the Sun enters the sign of Aries, the time changes, that is, winter turns into spring. And when it enters Taurus, the vernal time is fixed. But when the Sun enters Gemini, the time becomes common, i.e., half spring and half summer, and so on for the others. Concerning the aspects of the planets. Signs are also said to aspect each other: that is, every sign aspects the third before it and the third after it, which is the eleventh, and this aspect is called fertile and is an aspect of love and medium friendship, and it is also called sextile because it holds the sixth part of the circle, i.e., 60 degrees. For example, a planet that is at the beginning of Aries aspects that which is in Gemini before it and that which is in Aquarius after it, which is an aspect of friendship. And it aspects the fourth before it and the fourth after it, i.e., the tenth, and this aspect is called tetragonal because it holds the fourth part of the sky, i.e., 90 degrees, and it is an aspect of discord and medium enmity. And it also aspects the fifth sign before it and the fifth after it, which is the ninth, and this aspect is called trine or trine radiation because it holds the third part of the sky, i.e., 120 degrees, and it is an aspect of perfect concord and love. It aspects the seventh by opposition, and it is an aspect of perfect enmity. And if planets are in these signs thus aspecting each other, they are said to aspect each other; this is an aspect. And if two planets are in one sign, they are said to be conjoined. When a planet is in some sign, its rays will be in those signs that aspect that sign in a similar degree and minute. For example, if Mars is in the first degree of Aries and in the first minute of that degree, its rays will be in the first degree of the sign of Libra and in the first minute of that degree. Understand this for the other aspects as is most clearly shown in this figure.

[Planets in Signs and Body Parts]
In Taurus, Saturn rules the belly, Jupiter the back, Mars the neck, Sol the knees, Venus the head, Mercury the feet, Luna the legs. In Gemini, Saturn rules the belly, Jupiter the genitals and what follows them, Mars the chest and what follows it, Sol the legs and ankles (that is, the heels), Venus the neck, Mercury the head, Luna the thighs. In Cancer, Saturn rules the genitals and all that follows them, Jupiter the thighs, Mars the chest, Sol the feet, Venus the arms and shoulders, Mercury the eyes and throat, Luna the head. In Leo, Saturn rules the genitals and what follows them, Jupiter the thighs and knees, Mars the belly, Sol the head, Venus the heart, Mercury the shoulders and throat, Luna the neck. In Virgo, Saturn rules the feet, Jupiter the knees and what follows them, Mars the belly, Sol the neck, Venus the belly, Mercury the heart, Luna the shoulders. In Libra, Saturn rules the knees and what follows them, Jupiter the eyes and what follows them (that is, parts of the head), Mars the genitals and what follows them, Sol the shoulders, Venus the head, Mercury the belly, Luna the neck. In Scorpio, Saturn rules the ankles (that is, the heels) and what follows them, Jupiter the feet, Mars the head, arms, and thighs, Sol the neck, Venus the genitals and what follows them, Mercury the nose, Luna the belly. In Sagittarius, Saturn rules the feet, Jupiter the legs and head, Mars the feet and hands, Sol the belly, Venus the thighs and arms, Mercury the genitals and heart, Luna the back. In Capricorn, Saturn rules the head and feet, Jupiter the knees and eyes, Mars the legs and shoulders, Sol the back, Venus the thighs and heart, Mercury the genitals and what follows them, Luna the thighs. In Aquarius, Saturn rules the head and neck, Jupiter the shoulders, chest, and feet, Mars the ankles and heart, Sol the genitals and what follows them, Venus the knees and what follows them, Mercury the thighs and neck, Luna the genitals. In Pisces, Saturn rules the shoulders, arms, and neck, Jupiter the heart and head, Mars the ankles and belly, Sol the thighs and what follows them, Venus the neck and back, Mercury the legs and genitals, Luna the thighs. Concerning the masculine and feminine degrees of the signs. There are also in each sign degrees which are properly called masculine and feminine. For from the beginning of Aries up to the 8th degree they are said to be masculine; and from the 7th to the 9th, feminine; and from the 9th to the 15th, masculine; and from the 15th up to the 22nd, feminine; and from the 22nd up to the end of Aries, masculine. We have decided to describe these as we described the terms, and here we depict a table so that the work may be more easily understood, with God's help. 1 masculine, 8 feminine, 1 masculine, 6 feminine, 7 masculine, 8 feminine, 5 masculine, 6 feminine, 6 masculine, 4 feminine, 3 masculine, 0 feminine, 5 masculine, 3 feminine, 6 masculine, 4 feminine, 4 masculine, 2 feminine, 6 masculine, 2 feminine, 2 masculine, 11 feminine, 4 masculine, 3 masculine, 8 masculine, 5 feminine, 3 masculine, 7 feminine, 8 masculine, 7 feminine, 8 masculine, 4 feminine, 8 masculine, 10 masculine, 5 feminine, 10 masculine, 5 feminine, 7 masculine, 3 masculine, 4 feminine, 10 masculine, 3 feminine, 8 masculine, 5 masculine, 2 feminine, 3 masculine, 7 feminine, 12 masculine, 6 masculine, 11 feminine, 8 masculine, 11 masculine, 5 feminine, 10 masculine, 6 feminine, 4 masculine, 2 feminine, 3 masculine, 10 masculine, 10 feminine, 10 masculine, 3 feminine, 5 masculine, 2. Concerning the lucid, dark, smoky, and empty degrees. In each of these signs there are degrees which are called lucid, and degrees which are called dark, and degrees which are called smoky, and degrees which are called empty. For some say that from the beginning of Aries up to the third degree they are dark; and from the 3rd to the 8th, lucid; and from the 8th to the 16th, dark; and from the 16th to the 20th, lucid; and from the 20th up to the 24th, empty; and from the 23rd up to the 28th, lucid; and from the 29th to the end of Aries, empty. We will make a table of these, if God wills.

[Masculine and Feminine Degrees]
1 masculine, 8 feminine, 1 masculine, 6 feminine, 7 masculine, 8 feminine, 5 masculine, 6 feminine, 6 masculine, 4 feminine, 3 masculine, 0 feminine, 5 masculine, 3 feminine, 6 masculine, 4 feminine, 4 masculine, 2 feminine, 6 masculine, 2 feminine, 2 masculine, 11 feminine, 4 masculine, 3 masculine, 8 masculine, 5 feminine, 3 masculine, 7 feminine, 8 masculine, 7 feminine, 8 masculine, 4 feminine, 8 masculine, 10 masculine, 5 feminine, 10 masculine, 5 feminine, 7 masculine, 3 masculine, 4 feminine, 10 masculine, 3 feminine, 8 masculine, 5 masculine, 2 feminine, 3 masculine, 7 feminine, 12 masculine, 6 masculine, 11 feminine, 8 masculine, 11 masculine, 5 feminine, 10 masculine, 6 feminine, 4 masculine, 2 feminine, 3 masculine, 10 masculine, 10 feminine, 10 masculine, 3 feminine, 5 masculine, 2.

[Lucid, Dark, Smoky, and Empty Degrees]
In each of these signs there are degrees which are called lucid, and degrees which are called dark, and degrees which are called smoky, and degrees which are called empty. For some say that from the beginning of Aries up to the third degree they are dark; and from the 3rd to the 8th, lucid; and from the 8th to the 16th, dark; and from the 16th to the 20th, lucid; and from the 20th up to the 24th, empty; and from the 23rd up to the 28th, lucid; and from the 29th to the end of Aries, empty. We will make a table of these, if God wills.

[The Twelfth House]
The twelfth house is of enemies, labor, sadness, envy, whispering, cunning, ingenuity, and beasts. It signifies the end of life and what happens to mothers in their conception, whether good or bad. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the house of enemies: the first signifies enemies, the second labors, and the third beasts and cattle. These are what the twelve houses signify. Concerning the colors of the twelve houses: The twelve houses also signify colors, and these are: the first house, the ascendant, and the seventh are white. The second and twelfth are green. The third and eleventh are yellow. The fourth and tenth are red. The fifth and eighth are honey-colored, that is, the color of honey. The sixth and ninth are black. Concerning the joys of the planets in the houses: Each planet has in one of these houses a certain power from the accidental powers, which are called joy: Mercury rejoices in the ascendant. The Moon in the third house. Venus also in the fifth. Mars in the sixth. The Sun in the eighth. Jupiter in the eleventh. Saturn in the twelfth. Concerning the strength of the angles: It is said that in the significations of the houses, the angles signify strength and perfection. Those falling from the angles, however, signify weakness and detriment. The eighth and fourth signify a suitable and revealed thing with fame. The twelfth and sixth signify concealment, retention, and the vileness of things. The angles and the lords of the angles signify the magnitude of good things, of price, and of fortune; strength, exercise, and elongation from the cause. Their presence in the cadent houses is contrary to fortune, that is, disgrace and fall. Concerning those succeeding the angles: The house succeeding the tenth, that is, the eleventh, signifies medium strength and fortune through friends, and from that part in which there was trust. And that which follows the fourth, that is, the fifth, signifies medium fortune through gifts and venerations and with children, with veneration, joy, and gladness. That which succeeds the ascendant, which is the second, similarly signifies medium fortune from the cause of substance and ministers. That which succeeds the seventh, that is, the eighth, similarly signifies medium fortune from inheritance, that is, from what is inherited from the dead and from hidden things. Concerning the significations of the lords of the angles: These are the significations of the lords of the angles when they are present in the angles. The presence of the lord of the ascendant in the ascendant signifies fortune for himself, and through his acquisition. And his presence in the tenth signifies kingship and higher magistracies. And when he is in the seventh, through conventions and agents and your things, through the presence of those whom he signifies in the fourth, fortune, inheritances, and the causes of fathers, through the production of waters and populations or plantations, that is, buildings, and from ancient and radical things. The lord of the tenth also signifies, through his presence in the tenth, fortune either through the king or through a great kingdom and higher magistracies. And his presence in the seventh signifies a kingdom through the victory of contentions and from the causes of wives. And through his presence in the fourth, he signifies a kingdom through the friendship of nobles and his king, and through the causes of tribunes, and through the dispensers of kings and the cultivation of lands and the building of cities, and through the divisions of rivers and the guardianship of cities, and from ancient things. And through his presence in the ascendant, he signifies kingdoms through ingenuity and through the proximity of the king to the things of the common people. The presence of the lord of the seventh in the seventh signifies fortune through negotiations and through conventions, and also through nourishments and women, and through agents. And his presence in the fourth signifies through the conventions of women, and through negotiations, and through the causes of fathers and inheritances and the cultivation of land. And his presence in the ascendant signifies through conventions and negotiations.

[Significations of Venus]
of waters, from the measure of water and also of earth; and from the quality of the soul, it signifies generosity and modesty and justice, and from sects, plurality and simulation. Some, however, have said that it signifies the liver and stomach and the left ear, arms and belly, and the lower parts of the pelvis and intestines, and from colors, the color of ashes and green and similar ones; and from tastes, sweetness; and the quantity of its orb is 9 degrees. And from days, Thursday; from nights, the night of Monday; and its fridaria years, that is, its dominion, are 12; and its maximum years are 428, major are 79, medium are 45 and a half, minor are 12; and its strength from the regions of the circle is in the west. And Masha'allah said that among men it signifies a white man having redness in his face, having eyes not entirely black, nostrils not equal and short, bald, having some blackness in his teeth, of beautiful stature, good spirit, good morals, beautiful body. And Dorotheus said that it signifies a man having large eyes, and a wide pupil, a curly beard; and it has from regions Alchirath, Babylonia, Asen, and Persia, and Alarames and Arcadia; and from parts, it has the part of perfect habit; and it signifies faith and appetite for good; and from works, health, security, and participation.

[Significations of Mars]
Mars is masculine, nocturnal, and evil; it produces heat and dryness; and it is the significator of brothers and peregrinations; and it has from ages youth up to the end of youth; and its nature is choleric, of a bitter taste; and from crafts, every fiery craft and what is done by iron and fire, such as the striking of swords with hammers. And if Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies the striking of iron. If Jupiter, it signifies the striking of brass. If the Sun, it signifies the striking of gold coins. If Venus, it signifies the craft of ornaments. If Mercury, the striking of needles. If the Moon, it signifies the striking of book covers; it also signifies, when alone, the signification of the work of medicine. If no planet is conjoined with it, it signifies diminution, and wounding, and aptitude, and similar things. And if Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of medicine and wounds. And if Jupiter, it signifies the work of natures. And if the Sun, it signifies the care of eyes. If Venus, it signifies the work of ornament, such as cutting hair and beards and trimming nails; and if Mercury, it signifies the cutting of veins. If the Moon, it signifies the eradication of teeth and the cleansing of ears. And by itself, it signifies the injuries of the miserable, and the shedding of blood, and oppressions by force, and the cutting off of roads, and anger, and the leadership of an army, and haste, and shamelessness, and peregrination outside the homeland, and the foulness of coitus, the falling of children, that is, abortions, middle brothers and sisters, knowledge and discretion in the care of animals. And from illnesses, hot and bloody fevers, and bloody pustules, alabraba which is redness of the body with roughness and foulness and consumption of flesh with putrefaction; and half a headache; and sacred fire, and fear and horrible thoughts that disturb men and move and impede and render them empty; whatever is with inflammation of heat. And from the quality of the soul, namely, emotional disturbance and perturbation. If Saturn aspects it, it signifies hatred and great envy; and from sects, that in which there is war and unity and swiftness of change of faith; and a multitude of desires and change from testament to testament; all these will be under unity. Some have said that it has from the members the gall, kidneys, and veins, and the flow of semen and urine; it has from colors redness; and from tastes bitterness; and the quantity of its orb is 8 degrees. And from days, Tuesday; and from nights, the night of Saturday. Its fridaria years are seven; and its maximum years are 264, major are 66, medium are 40 and a half, minor are 15; and its strength in the regions of the circle is in the south. And Masha'allah said that it signifies among the images of men a red man having reddish hair and a round face, slightly dishonest, having yellowish eyes, of a bold appearance, audacious, having a mark or stain on his foot. And Dorotheus said that it signifies one having a sharp gaze; and from parts, the part of audacity; and it signifies perseverance, cunning, and pride, and lightness, and mobility, and audacity, and negotiation, sharpness, and haste in all things; and it has from the parts of the world Asia and the lands of the Romans up to the west, and the lands of the Tuscans.

[Significations of the Sun]
The Sun is fortunate by aspect, and evil by conjunction in one sign; and it is masculine, diurnal; it produces heat and dryness; and it is the significator of fathers. If the nativity is in the day, it signifies the greatest kingdom and a vital soul and light and splendor and intellect and beauty and cleanliness and faith. And from age, the end of youth. And it participates with all planets in the disposition of years. And from crafts, governance and principality; and it signifies the throwing of javelins and hunting, purification with every kind of cleansing by which bodies are purified internally and externally. And from illnesses, it signifies hot and dry illnesses appearing in bodies. And from substance, much gold and all kinds of substance. And from the quality of the soul itself, sublimity, prudence, and it follows honesty, that is, generosity and glory; and length of mind. And from sects, good culture and similar things. And it signifies the power of voice and the strength of swiftness. If Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies stewardship and such principality. If Jupiter, it signifies principality in faith and religion and also a judge judging among men the works of oppressors or injuries, etc. If Mars, it signifies the leadership of an army and the investigation of wars. If Venus, it signifies a kingdom through women and through the obedience of the powerful. If Mercury, it signifies the counselors of kings and the work of books and inheritances and greater works. If the Moon, it signifies the work of legates and the detection of counsels and similar things. And some have said that the Sun signifies the image of a man's face; and specifically, in men, the right eye; in women, the left eye. And some have said that it has the brain and marrow and thighs. And from illnesses, the consumption of flesh in the mouth; and the detriment of all property; and the descent of water into the eye; its part in the head. And the Indians said that when it is in the ascendant, it will be burning and will have a mark on the face. And it has from colors whatever appears of a foreign color; and from tastes, sourness. And the quantity of its orb is 15 degrees. And from days, it has Sunday; and from nights, the night of Thursday. Its fridaria years are ten. And its major years are 120, maximum are 460, medium are 39 and a half, or according to some, 69 and a half; minor are 19. Its strength from the regions of the circle is in the east. And Masha'allah said that it signifies among the figures of men him who has a color between yellowish and black, that is, dark, covered with redness, of short stature, curly, bald, of beautiful body; and it has from tastes sharpness. And Dorotheus said that the figure of the Sun and Moon is the figure of the planets that are with them or of that which is more dignified in their place. Therefore, if you wish to know the figure of the Sun, know that it is yellowish, having a part of redness in the hair, its eyes somewhat yellowish. And from parts, having a part of future things, that is, a part of divination; and it is the significator of natures and the spirit of wisdom, elevation, and perfection of faith, also of sciences and praises. And from the parts of the world, it has Samarkand and Cura and Serit and its territories and the lands of the Romans. Leborus, Lelilad, F.

[Significations of the Planets]
If it is Fortune itself, Venus signifies courtesy and kindness, and a gentle spirit, and honest customs, and swiftness of movement, and divine obedience. If it is Jupiter, it signifies honesty, caution, and companionship, and kindness, and beauty of life. And if it is afflicted by malefics and it is Mars, it signifies a tendency to whisper among men and to use such things. If Saturn, hatred, simulation, and envy. If the Sun is in a praiseworthy aspect, it signifies a royal disposition. And if it is Mercury, it signifies rhetoric, that is, eloquence and goodness of tongue and writing. And some have said that it signifies thought and novelty of mind and weakness of sense and heaviness of tongue, and honest women, the nourishment of infants, and mothers and maternal aunts, and the preparation of foods. And others have said that it properly signifies the brain and the lung. And from colors it has saffron, and from tastes, salt. And the quantity of its orb is 12 degrees. And it signifies the left eye in men, and the right in women. And from days it has Monday, and from nights, the night of Venus. Its Firdaria years are nine, or 105 major, 520 maximum, and 66 and a half medium, and according to some, 39 and a half, and 25 minor. And its strength from the regions of the circle is to the right of the west. And Masha'allah said that among the figures of men, it signifies a white man tinged with redness, with joined eyebrows, benevolent, having eyes not entirely black, a round beautiful stature, and a mark on his face. And from earthly things it has artichoke and tinamou and alder. And some have said that it signifies childhood from the beginning of the month up to 7 days; from 7 days up to 14 days, youth; and it signifies the age of perfection, that is, middle age up to 21 days and nights; and old age up to conjunction, that is, up to the end of the month when it is conjoined with the Sun. And when it is under the Sun's rays, it signifies secrets and hidden things; and similarly every planet. And at the beginning of the month when it increases, it signifies everything that is to be done; and at its fullness, what is to be destroyed, because it decreases. And at the beginning of the month, it and the Sun signify accusers; and at the end of the month, the accused. And at the beginning of the month, it signifies gain and continence; at the end of the month, stipends and dispersions. And in opposition, it signifies contrariety. And at the beginning of the change to opposition, that is, when there are 15 degrees between it and the opposition, it signifies the beginning of contrariety and its cause. And when it has separated from opposition, it signifies the causes of exception from contrariety. And in its exit from under the Sun's rays, it signifies exit from concealment and its daughter. And in its entrance under the rays, it signifies adaptation to concealment. And the hour of its division from the Sun signifies its aptative exit from concealment. And the hour of its exit from under the rays signifies appearance, arrival from absence. And when it is in the fourth aspect of the Sun, it signifies diminution of a thing or descent from high to low. Similarly in the fourth aspect, but in the first fourth aspect, it signifies the appearance of things and gain and increase of continence; and in the second fourth aspect of the Sun, it signifies the opposite of these. And some have said that from the conjunction up to the first half of its light, its nature will be humid; and from the middle of its light up to its fullness, its nature will be hot; from its fullness up to the second half of its light, its nature will be dry; and from the second half of its light up to the conjunction, its nature will be cold. The other planets, from their rising up to their first station, will be in the nature of humidity and signify childhood; and from their first station up to the opposition of the Sun, their nature will be hot and signify youth; and from this place up to the second station, their nature will be dry and signify perfect age; and from their second station up to their first occultation, their nature will be cold and signify cold old age. And some have said that the Sun signifies the spirit, that is, the vital soul. The Moon, thought and sense. Saturn, melancholy and sadness, vitality and evil. Jupiter, wisdom and reason. Mars, anger, fury, and swiftness. Venus, play and joy. Mercury, rationality or dialectic and discipline. And because we have spoken in this chapter about the signification of the planets when they are conjoined with another planet, similarly it must be considered in other things that the planets signify. Regarding the order of the planets or their rulership when in the conception of children, when they have been in the mother's womb, it must be known that the first month from the hour of conception is of Saturn. The second of Jupiter. The third of Mars. The fourth of the Sun. The fifth of Venus. The sixth of Mercury. The seventh of the Moon. The eighth of Saturn; and therefore he who is born in the eighth month does not live, because he is born under the power of Saturn. And the ninth of Jupiter. The rulership or order of the planets in human life, that is, how they dispose the life of the native, is divided thus: The Moon begins from the native's entrance, that is, from the birth of the child, and disposes the quantity of nourishing years, which are four years. Then Mercury for ten, then Venus for eight. Afterwards the Sun for nineteen. Afterwards Mars for fifteen. Afterwards Jupiter for twelve. Then Saturn up to the end of life. Regarding the nature of the Dragon's Head and Tail. The Dragon's Head is masculine. Similarly, it is also fortune, and its nature is composed of the nature of Jupiter and Venus; and this signifies kingdom and fortune and substance. And some have said that its nature is augmentation, because when it is with benefics, it increases their fortune; and when it is with malefics, it increases their malice. And its Firdaria years are three. Its Tail, however, is evil; and its nature is composed of the nature of Saturn and Mars; it signifies dejection and fall and poverty. And some have said that its nature signifies diminution, because when it is with benefics, it diminishes their fortune; when it is with malefics, it diminishes their malice. Therefore it is said that the Head is benefic when it is with benefics, and malefic when with malefics; and the Tail is malefic when with benefics, and benefic when with malefics. And its Firdaria years are two. Regarding the hours of the day and night, which belong to the planets. If there is any day or night of any of the planets, the first hour is of that planet, and the second hour is of the other planet that succeeds it; the succession of the others is according to the order of the circles by proportion, for example: on the day of Venus, to which the day belongs, the first hour is of Venus itself, the second of Mercury, the third of the Moon, the fourth of Saturn, the fifth of Jupiter, the sixth of Mars, the seventh of the Sun, the eighth again of Venus, the ninth of Mercury, the tenth of the Moon, the eleventh of Saturn, the twelfth of Jupiter. Behold, you have 12 unequal hours of the day. Likewise for the hours of the night. The first hour of the following night is of Mars, to which the whole night belongs. The second of the Sun. The third of Venus. The fourth of Mercury. The fifth of the Moon. The sixth of Saturn. The seventh of Jupiter. The eighth again of Mars. The ninth of the Sun. The tenth of Venus. The eleventh of Mercury. The twelfth of the Moon. And thus you also have 12 unequal hours of the night. And the day of Saturday begins afterwards, whose first hour is of Saturn; and the whole day is his. Thus by counting in order, you will find the hours of the days and nights and their divisions among the individual planets, if God wills. Regarding masculine and feminine hours. The hours are also said to be masculine and feminine, because the first hour of each day and night is masculine, the second feminine, the third masculine, the fourth feminine. Thus they succeed in order, one feminine, the other masculine, up to the end of the day and night.

[Mars, Venus, and Mercury]
to choose by color. For in this saying there is a doubt which we must resolve. For many believe that color does not show the virtue of a thing, and this is true in earthly things because of the mixture of elements that is in them. But in celestial things it is not so, because their substance is in no way composed of any element. And because of this, Ptolemy returned to proving this virtue in another way, saying: and that which exists around the Sun, and that the sphere in which the Sun is placed is below it, he wants to say that it happens that this thing is true because the virtue of Mars burns that which exists around the Sun, and that the Sun is below them, its virtue mixes with that of the Sun, it is very hot and dry, so that it burns without moderation. Daly Abenragel says Mars is a hot and dry, fiery planet, a destroyer, angry, victorious, loving to kill and slaughter, quarrels, disputes, quick to anger, sounding anger, exposing his whole body in his affairs, making battles and destroying populations. His exaltation is in the house of Saturn, that is, in Capricorn, which signifies shouts, impediments, and foolish people and wars. Saturn agrees with Mars in misfortune and resists him in coldness and darkness, inclines to the Sun for love of it and defends it with the help of its rays, because the Sun is exalted in its house and governs it with heat and dryness, and receives from it: its property and nature agree and approach the property and nature of the Sun. He is ignorant and forgetful of little intellect and diminished sense, nor does he consider the ends of things: through him and through his ascent and descent in his circle, the heat of summer and the cold of winter increase and decrease every year. Alfragan says that Mars contains the quantity of the earth one and a half and an eighth part of it. If by aspect fortune. The nature of the Sun and the letter needs no gloss. Ptolemy says it is known that the work of the substance of the Sun is to heat and to give some dryness, and these operations are felt more properly and are more easily known than all others because of the magnitude of the Sun and because of the manifest change which it makes through the seasons of the year, and the more it approaches our heads, the more it heats. Daly Abenragel says know that the Sun is the light and candle of heaven, the governor of the world, the maker of seasons: through it the planets become oriental and occidental: and through it they become apparent and hidden: and through it every moving thing moves: through it every nascent thing is known: every leaf grows and every fruit ripens. He is the great spirit of heaven, with him the signs are vivified: and every sign when it is in him has greater power over other signs. Because he vivifies and illuminates it and gives it strength and heat and applies the heat and strength and virtue of that sign to the earth: because its nature and its deeds appear in all things and in all living and inanimate things existing on earth. And when it leaves the sign in which it is, that sign remains in the likeness of a dead body. It is a planet of great dominion, power, nobility, height and magnitude. It is fortune by aspect and misfortune by bodily conjunction. For you see that when any planet joins with it: it burns and overcomes it and extinguishes its light and splendor. Its place in heaven is the fourth, that is, the middle. And of the planets: like a wise king who maintains his kingdom by sense and by consideration places his seat in the middle of his kingdom so that he may reach through all sides. He gave Mars his militia and that he should be hard in his militia: because the heaven of the Sun is below the heaven of Mars and its nature and heat agree with the nature and heat of that. He gave Jupiter his judgments because of the temperance, honesty, salvation and health of his complexion: and that there is no bad quality in him nor a nature to sin. He gave Saturn the kingdom because all planets send their lights to him and their considerations. He gave Venus the collection of revenues and the selling of revenues and buying: because its heaven applies to his and they are neighbors. He gave Mercury the scribeship: because his status is like the status of the king's scribe who goes when he goes and sits when he sits. He gave the Moon the viziership: who is like the king's vizier who does his commands and carries them wherever he commands. Alfragan says on the authority of Ptolemy that the body of the Sun contains the body of the earth sixty-six times and a little more. Venus, strong, feminine, nocturnal, here places the nature of Venus and it is clear in the letter what it says. Ptolemy says Venus herself does the works of Jupiter because of the temperance of her complexion, except that she is contrary to Jupiter in one thing: because she heats a little because she exists around the Sun and moistens according to the Moon because of the great light this planet has because it attracts to itself the smokiness that rises from the humors of the earth. Daly in his commentary wants to say that her heat is much less than that of Jupiter: and because of the humidity she makes, we say that she is somewhat cold and more humid. But what he says because she exists around the Sun, he said because her virtue is willing with that of the Sun. And what he said she moistens like the Moon: he wants to say that Venus makes humidity around her that the Moon makes. And what he said because of great light, he wants to say that little heat makes humors flow. Daly Abenragel says Venus is a cold and humid nocturnal fortune, cheerful, joyful, of good appetite, clear, beautiful: she loves embraces, songs, eating, drinking and vices: she is gentle and of little movement. She is a significator of women and of lying with them, of love, friendship and society. She receives Mars by nature of fornication and purification, she abhors him by the property of her nature which is heat and dryness. She separates herself from him and repels his evil and misfortune from herself because of her gentleness, good words, good solace, and gentle speech. She agrees with Saturn in coldness and the presence she has with him in Libra: because it is the house of one and the exaltation of the other. And she disagrees with him in morals, sadness and his sorrows and because Saturn is of little use with women. The status of Venus with the status of the Sun is similar to the status of a woman towards a man. Alfragan says that the body of Venus is one part of 37 parts of the earth. Mercury is mixed with the hypothesis and Ptolemy says: but the dryness and humidity of Mercury is by an equal one: because sometimes it dries and drives away humors because it never moves far from the heat of the Sun, also at no time, and sometimes it moistens because it is placed above the sphere of the Moon which is closer to the earth than all other spheres and changes to these two states and makes winds because of its late changes around the Sun. Daly in his commentary says. He wants to say that the work of Mercury is not one thing alone: because sometimes it dries and sometimes it moistens. But when it dries, it is when it applies to the Sun and then its work is in heating and drying around that of the Sun. But its moistening is because of its power which mixes with that of the Moon which is placed below it and its work is like the work of the Moon. And Ptolemy who makes a comparison of the work of Mercury with that of the Sun found that some made such a work as the Sun. And when he makes a comparison with the work of the Moon, he found that sometimes it made such a work as the Moon. And he experienced this many times and found that it always made one of the two works and knew for certain that its work is according to the work of the other stars with which it is involved: and it has no proper work in itself. Daly Abenragel says. Mercury is a planet of evils, violences, documents, scribeship, computations, sciences: it is hot and dry, of changeable form and nature: masculine with males: feminine with females: fortunate with fortunes: unfortunate with misfortunes: well-reasoned: eloquent, bold in speaking: of beautiful appearance: of composed person: he loves books and computations. He likes magistracies: well-done things, verified reasons, books and sciences: he is agile in movement and of ardent piety: lively and mobile in all his affairs; and he is one of the three planets.

[Almuten Calculation and Profection]
If a planet has a greater share or more strengths in the five aforementioned places, from which it receives hyleg, which are the place of the Sun, the place of the Moon, the place of conjunction or prevention, the Part of Fortune, and the degree of the Ascendant, that planet is the almuten, meaning the victor. And if any planet has dignities in one or three or more of the aforementioned places, that is the almuten. For example: I assume that one planet is the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of the terms of the same Ascendant, and with this, the lord of the face of the same. Such a planet would have 8 strengths in the Ascendant. And I assume that another planet is the lord of the exaltation of the Ascendant and the lord of the house of the Sun's place and the lord of the triplicity of the Part of Fortune. Such a planet would be more worthy as almuten than the first, because it has more strengths in the aforementioned places. And to shorten the discourse, the strengths of each planet should be collected in the five aforementioned places, and the one among them that abounds in the number of strengths will be the almuten. From this comes profection in the years of nativities and of the world. In this chapter, it teaches how profection moves from one sign to another, and this in two ways. First, in the years of nativities. Second, in the years of great conjunctions. The work in the years of nativities is easy, and the meaning of the letter is this: When you wish to know to which sign the year of profection of someone's nativity applies, see how many complete years have passed since birth, and you will begin from the ascending degree of the nativity, and you will give one sign to each year, and where the number ends, there will be the sign of profection from the Ascendant. For example: the Ascendant of someone's nativity was 10 degrees of Aries. At the end of the first year, profection comes to 10 degrees of Taurus. At the end of the second year, to 10 degrees of Gemini, and so on according to this order, giving one sign to each year until the completion of 12 years. For then, at the end of 12 years, it returns to the radical place. If, however, many years have passed since birth, subtract 12 from the total number of completed years that have passed since birth as many times as you can, that is, divide by 12, and project the number that remains below 12 from the Ascendant of the nativity according to the method previously stated. For example: the Ascendant of a certain nativity was 13 degrees of Virgo, and 32 complete solar years have passed since birth. I will subtract 12 from 32 years twice, and 8 complete years remain. I will therefore give the first year to Virgo, the second to Libra, the third to Scorpio, the fourth to Sagittarius, the fifth to Capricorn, the sixth to Aquarius, the seventh to Pisces, the eighth to Aries. The profection will then come to the sign that immediately succeeds, namely to Taurus, to a degree similar to the radical degree, namely to the 13th of the same. As I said about the ascending degree, so it must be done for the degree of the Sun, and the degree of the Moon, and the degree of the Part of Fortune. And where the year applies, the lord of that sign is the disposer of that year. And from that, the deeds in which the native will be involved in that year, and the fortunes and misfortunes that will befall him in that year, are taken. The author gives examples in the text, so it is not necessary to insist much on examples. Then the author says that when the profection of the year has reached some degree of some sign, and there is some planet or the rays of some planet after that degree, in the same sign or in the same house in the figure, and you wish to know when the profection will reach that planet or its rays: see how many degrees and minutes there are between the degree to which the year has come and that planet or its rays, and multiply them by 12 and one-sixth. This is to say, you will give to each degree 12 days and one-sixth of one, and you will find the days from the beginning of that year until the time when the profection will reach the planet or its rays. The reason why 12 days and one-sixth of one are given to each degree is that in this way, at the end of the year, one sign is completed. For if you multiply 30 degrees by 12 and one-sixth, you will get 365 days, which are the days of one year. Ptolemy says in proposition 236 of the fourth part of the Quadripartitum: "And we will know the disposition of the events of the years by taking the number of years of the nativity, and we will project them from each of the hylegical places according to the order of the signs, giving one year to each sign, and we will take the dispositor from the sign to which the number of degrees applies." Indeed, Da Ly in his commentary says that in this saying, Ptolemy wants to state that each sign disposes in one year, and thus the revolution of the sign in which the significator is will go, so that every 12 years it returns once until the end of life. All astrologers know this. Profection, however, from the years of the world. This work of profection is in the years of the world. The meaning of the letter is this: When you wish to know the application of the years of any sect, see how many complete solar years have passed from the beginning of that year in which there was a great conjunction that signified that sect, and divide that number of years by 12, and project the number that remains below 12 from the Ascendant of that year in which the conjunction occurred, and where the number applies, there is the sign of profection. The author gives an example in the text about the sect of the Saracens, i.e., Muhammad, and says that between the year of the conjunction that signified that law and the year of Muhammad's appearance, i.e., when he began to preach, there were 61 years. Another text says 52 years. I believe it should be 52 years and 57 days, otherwise it will not agree with what he says later. And the Ascendant of the year in which that conjunction occurred was the sign of Gemini, and that year in which he began to preach came to the sign of Virgo, i.e., to the sign of that planet which was the lord of the ascending sign of the year of the conjunction. For if 61 is subtracted by 12 as many times as possible, 3 remain. Therefore, the first is Gemini, the second Cancer, the third Leo, and the incomplete year that was placed in the number came to the sign of Virgo. It is not of great concern to us how many years there were from the year of that conjunction until the first year of the Arabs. It is sufficient for us to know that the year in which the Arab years began came to Virgo, because the Arab years are known to us from the tables of their extraction, and we can begin from Virgo, as the author says in the text. And because the author himself and his works were in his parts for the years of the Persians, he applies his discourse to the years of the Persians, and says: when you wish to have a brief knowledge of this matter, to know to which sign the year applies from the year of the conjunction that signified the sect of the Saracens, see how many years of the Persians have passed, convert them into days by the table of their extraction serving the years of the Persians, or multiply the years by 365, for a Persian year contains that many days, because Persian years do not have the exact day, and to the number of days that you find, add 3624 days, for that many days were from the beginning of the Arab years until the beginning of the Persian years. And what is collected, divide by 365 and one-fourth, and solar years will result. If there is any remainder, these will be the days of the imperfect year. And you can also reduce the number of days to solar years by the tables of their extraction serving the solar years. The whole intention of the author is that we know how many complete solar years have passed from the beginning of the Arab years until the time of consideration, and we give to each.

[Parts of the Third House]
There are two parts of the third house. The first is the Part of Brothers. The second is the Part of the Benevolence of Brothers. Albumazar says that the Part of Brothers and its lord, that is, the lord of the sign in which it falls, signify the existence of brothers and their concord and love, and their peregrination and absence. After this, see if this part and its lord fall in signs of many children, then the brothers will be many. And if they fall in signs of few children, they will be few. And if you wish to know their number, take the number of signs that were between the part and the lord of the house in which it fell, or how many there were between the lord and the part, and assign one to each sign. And if there is a common sign between them, double the number of that sign. And if there is any other planet between the part itself and the lord of the house in which it fell, also assign one to it. Albumazar also places one part in this house which is called the Part of the Death of Brothers, and he says that it is taken in the day from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven, and at night the opposite. And the degrees of the Ascendant are added above, and it is projected from the Ascendant. As often as this part comes by direction to the significators of brothers and sisters, giving one year to each degree, or by perfection, giving a year to each sign, something horrible will happen to the brothers and sisters, or some of them will die. The Fourth House. Here are placed the parts of the fourth house, and there are five. The first is the Part of Fathers. The second is the Part of the Death of the Father. The third is the Part of Years. The fourth is the Part of Inheritances and Possessions. The fifth is the Part of the Nobility of the Native, whether he is the son of him to whom he is assigned or not. The sixth is the Part of the Lord of Things. Albumazar says that the Part of the Father signifies the existence of the father and his nobility and lineage. And if this part is of good essence, the father will be noble. And if the lord of the house of this part is of good essence, the father will be fortunate. But if it is of bad essence, he will be laborious. From the second part of this house, which is the Part of the Death of the Father, the cause of death is taken. As often as the perfection of the year comes to this part or to its lord, it signifies danger to the father. And if any of them come to the significators of the father. The Fifth House. Here are placed the parts of the fifth house, and there are seven. The first is the Part of Children. The second is the Part of the Time in which children should be had. The third is the Part by which masculinity or femininity is known. The fourth is the Part by which it is known concerning the native about whom the question is asked, whether he is male or female. The fifth is the Part to which, when Jupiter comes, it is a signification of a child. The sixth is the Part of the Love of Children. The seventh is the Part of the Knowledge of Children. Albumazar says that if the Part of Children falls in a sign of many children, he will have many children. But if it falls in a sterile sign, he will not have any child. But if it falls in a sign of few children, he will have few children. And if this part signifies children and is fortunate, the children will live. And if unfortunate, they will die. The Sixth House. Here are placed the parts of the sixth house, and there are two. The first is the Part of Azemena, that is, the inseparable debility of some member. The second is the Part of Servants. If the Part of Azemena is conjoined with benefics, the native will be healthy in his members. But if it is conjoined with malefics, he will have inseparable diseases in his members. And the places where these diseases will be are known from the places of the malefics signifying them. Here are placed the parts of the seventh house, and there are four. The first is the Part of the Betrothal of Men. The second is the Part of the Betrothal of Women. And this is taken in two ways. The third is of Delight and Pleasure. The fourth is the Part of Marriages. When the Part of Betrothal comes by direction to Jupiter or Venus, it is a signification of betrothal. And I found in one nativity the time of betrothal when the lord of the Part of Betrothal came to that part by direction, giving one year to each degree. The Eighth House. Here are placed the parts of the eighth house, and there are four. The first is the Part of Death. The second is the Part of the Planet that kills. The third is the Part of the Year in which death or poverty will come to the native. The fourth is the Part of Prevention and Litigation. Here Albumazar says that if the Part of Death is impeded and its lord, and benefics do not aspect them, the native will die a most shameful death. But if benefics aspect them, it will be the opposite. If the Moon or Sun aspects the Part of the Killing Planet, and the Moon itself is in a sign of amputated members, the native will die by suffering. And if the Moon is impeded, something will be cut off from his members. When the Part of the Year in which death is feared for the native and its lord, with the lord of the Ascendant, are impeded, the native will be of many infirmities and affliction in body and substance, and will often approach the loss of body and substance. And as often as the perfection of the year comes to this part, or this part comes by perfection or direction to the Ascendant or to its lord, the native will find dangers in body and infirmities, and will find distress and horror in substance. He will also fear death from various parts. The Ninth House. Here are placed the parts of the ninth house, and there are two. The first is the Part of Peregrination. The second is the Part of Travel by Water. From these are taken the peregrinations of the native and travels by water. Albumazar says: If the Part of Travel by Water falls in an aquatic sign, the native will make many travels by water, and if it is fortunate there, he will have profit and gain in his travels. And if it is unfortunate, it signifies the opposite. The Tenth House. Here are placed the parts of the tenth house, and there are five. The first is the Part of Kings and Kingdom. The second is the Part of the King and Kingdom. The third is the Part of Principalities of the Kingdom. The fourth is the Part signifying whether it is the cause of the kingdom or not. The fifth is the Part of Mothers. The Eleventh House. Here are placed the parts of the eleventh house, and there are two. The first is the Part of Friends. The second is the Part signifying the profit and effect and friendship of friends. Here is placed only one part of the Twelfth House, that of enemies. And these are other parts that the masters of judgments use. Here are placed some other parts that are not in any of the houses, and there are six. The first is the Part of False Rumor. The second is the Part of Reason and Profundity of Sense. The third is the Part of Wisdom and Discipline. The fourth is the Part of War and Battles. The fifth is the Part of Patience. The sixth is the Part of Aspecting in the Revolution of Years. And all these are projected from the Ascendant. And because, with God's help, the author first placed the parts that fall in nativities. Here he places the parts that fall in the revolutions of the years of the world. And it can be divided into two parts: because first he places the parts that the masters of judgments use in revolutions in the causes of kingdoms. And he places the parts that the masters of judgments use in knowing the future of things. The second is there. Also, there are other parts here. He says that from the parts that are exercised in the revolutions of the years of the world to know the causes of the kingdom and empire, and this is taken from Mars to the Moon, and is projected from the Ascendant of the conjunction that signifies the change of the kingdom, and is taken in another way from the degree of the Ascendant of the conjunction to the degree of the conjunction, understanding from the degree of the Ascendant of the revolution of the year to the degree of the conjunction.

[Introduction to Astrological Judgments]
Alchabitius with commentary. With grace and privilege. Horizon B 8 II circular. Circle of Cancer. Equinoctial. Circle of Capricorn. Circle of Antarctic. Zenith oblique. The Isagogic Book of Abdilazi, that is, the servant of the glorious God, who is called Alchabitius, for the mastery of astrological judgments, interpreted by John of Seville, and a commentary on the same by John of Saxony, connected in a useful series, begin. Having sought from the Lord the longevity of Cephas Dala, that is, the sword of the kingdom and the durability of his honor, and also the custody of his works, whether good or bad, and the extension of his empire, let us begin what we wish to narrate. When I saw that some ancient authors of the mastery of astrological judgments had published books which they called introductory to this mastery, that is, of astrological judgments, but some of them had not diligently investigated all that is necessary in the same mastery concerning those things which are suitable for an introduction. And some indeed had presented what is necessary at length, and because I perceived that what is necessary in it had perished. And also, when I observed that some had not proceeded in the path of discipline in the arrangement of what they presented, I began to publish this book, and I made it an introduction. And I collected in it from the sayings of the ancients whatever is necessary for this mastery according to the introductory method, and I did not introduce the reasonings of disputation or defense of what we presented as necessary, since they are in Ptolemy's book which is called Alarbamacalet, that is, of four treatises, and in my book which I published in confirmation of the mastery of astrological judgments in the destruction of the epistle of Baissibenbali, in its annulment by reasoning which can suffice for this. And I divided it into five differences. The first difference is in the essential and accidental being of the circle of signs. The second difference is in the natures of the seven planets, what is proper to them, and what they signify. The third difference is in those things which happen to the seven planets in themselves, and what happens to them mutually. The fourth difference is in the exposition of astrological names. The fifth difference is in the universality of the parts and the exposition of their being in degrees. First difference. Concerning the division of the circle of signs. The zodiac, that is, the circle of signs, is divided into twelve equal parts according to the division of the circle of signs. And these twelve parts are called signs and refer to the images which are under the same zodiacal circle. They are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. And each of these signs is divided into thirty equal parts, called degrees. And a degree is divided into sixty minutes, and minutes into sixty seconds, and seconds into sixty thirds. Similarly, fourths and fifths follow, ascending to infinity. And six of these signs are northern, that is, from the beginning of Aries to the end of Virgo, and they are northern from the equinoctial line. And six are southern, that is, from the beginning of Libra to the end of Pisces. And six of them are called direct ascending, that is, from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Sagittarius. And six are called tortuous ascending, that is, from the beginning of Capricorn to the end of Gemini. And the tortuous ascending signs obey the direct ascending signs. That is, two signs which are of the same longitude from the head of Cancer obey each other, such as Gemini to Cancer, Taurus to Leo, Aries to Virgo. And Pisces to Libra, Aquarius to Scorpio, and Capricorn to Sagittarius. And two signs which are of the same longitude from the head of Aries are said to be in agreement in their path, such as Aries and Pisces, Taurus and Aquarius, Gemini and Capricorn, Cancer and Sagittarius, Leo and Scorpio, Virgo and Libra. And the half of the circle from the beginning of Leo to the end of Capricorn is called the greater half, and it is the half of the Sun, because the Sun has principality in all this half, just as the planets have in their terms. And the other half, which is from the beginning of Aquarius to the end of Cancer, is called the lesser half, and it is the half of the Moon, because the Moon similarly has principality in all this half, just as the Sun in the greater half. And that half which is from the beginning of Aries to the end of Virgo is called the hot half. And the other, which is from the beginning of Libra to the end of Pisces, is called the cold half. And that fourth part of the circle which is from the beginning of Aries to the end of Gemini is called the hot, humid, vernal, youthful, sanguine quarter. And that which is from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Virgo is called the hot, dry, aestival, adolescent, choleric quarter. And that which is from the beginning of Libra to the end of Sagittarius is called the cold, dry, autumnal, melancholic quarter, and it signifies the beginning of the diminution of middle age. And that which is from the beginning of Capricorn to the end of Pisces is called the cold, humid, defective, senile, hibernal, phlegmatic quarter. All the planets which are carried in these signs are not in them, but because they are carried under them, that is, in their direction. Higher and closer to the circle of signs and slower in course is Saturn, then Jupiter, then Mars, then the Sun, then Venus, then Mercury, then the Moon, which is closer to the Earth and faster in course than all. Certain significations are also indicated by the head of the Dragon and the tail with the planets, as we will explain in the following. Concerning the houses of the planets. The planets have powers in these signs, some by nature, some by accident. Those which are by nature are these: houses, exaltation, term, triplicity, face. We will treat of those which are by accident in a suitable place. The houses are these: Aries and Scorpio, house of Mars. Taurus and Libra, house of Venus. Gemini and Virgo, house of Mercury. Cancer, house of the Moon. Leo, house of the Sun. Sagittarius and Pisces, house of Jupiter. Capricorn and Aquarius, house of Saturn. The seventh sign from the house of each planet is said to be its detriment. And if two signs are the house of one planet, they are said to be in agreement in the almantica, that is, in the circle which is wide in the middle and narrow at the ligature, it signifies the zodiacal circle. The signs in which the planets are said to rejoice when they enter, and their lords according to Dorotheus, are these: Saturn is said to rejoice when he enters Aquarius. Jupiter in Sagittarius. Mars in Scorpio. Venus in Taurus. And Mercury in Virgo. Concerning the exaltations of the planets. These are the exaltations of the planets: The Sun is exalted in Aries, that is, in its 18th degree. The Moon in the 3rd degree of Taurus. Saturn in the 21st of Libra. Jupiter in the 15th degree of Cancer. Mars in the 28th degree of Capricorn. Venus in the 27th degree of Pisces. Mercury in the 15th of Virgo. The Head of the Dragon in the 3rd degree of Gemini. And the Tail in the 3rd degree of Sagittarius. In the seventh sign from the exaltation of each planet, in a similar degree will be its fall. For example, just as the Sun is exalted in the 18th degree of Aries, so it falls in the 18th degree of Libra, and so for the others. Ptolemy, however, places the whole of Aries as the exaltation of the Sun. And the whole of Taurus as the exaltation of the Moon, and so on for the others. Concerning triplicities. We distinguish triplicities thus: Three signs which appear to agree in one nature form a triplicity and are called by the same name, that is, triplicity. Therefore, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius form the first triplicity, because each of these signs is fiery, masculine, diurnal, hot, and dry, choleric, bitter in taste. This triplicity is also oriental. Its lords are the Sun by day and Jupiter by night, and their participant by day and night is Saturn. The second triplicity is from Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, because these are feminine, nocturnal, earthy, cold, and dry, melancholic, acrid in taste, southern signs. The lords of this triplicity are Venus by day and the Moon by night, whose participant by day and night is Mars. The third triplicity is from Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, because these signs are masculine, diurnal, sanguine, hot, humid, airy, sweet in taste, western. The lords of this triplicity are Saturn by day and Mercury by night, among whom Jupiter is the participant by day and night. The fourth triplicity is formed by Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, because these are feminine, nocturnal, northern, watery, phlegmatic, cold, humid, salty in taste. The lords of this triplicity are by day...

[Figure of Aspects]
Figure of aspects. From this, H 100% S 818 TR 2. As it is, r S * -A- *.

[Direction of Significators]
When you know the significator and wish to know where the direction will arrive from the circle of signs in a certain number of years, if the significator is in the ascendant, add the number of years to the ascensions of the degree of the ascendant, and make that arc in the ascensions of the region. Where the arc of degrees from the circle of signs ends, there the direction will arrive in that same year. If the significator is in the 7th house, add the number of years to the ascensions of the nadir of the significator's degree, and arc this also in the ascensions of the region. Where it ends from the circle of signs, the direction will arrive at its nadir in the same year. If the significator is in the 10th or 4th house, add the number of years to the ascensions of the significator's degree in the direct circle, and arc it in the ascensions of the direct circle. Where it ends from the circle of signs, there the direction will arrive in the same year. If the significator is outside these four places, which are the angles, you must know the hours of longitude from the angle as I said before. If the significator is in the eastern half, add the number of years you wish to the ascensions of the significator's degree through the direct circle, and arc this in the ascensions of the direct circle. What results will be the significator of the direct circle; keep it. After this, add the number of years also to the ascensions of the significator's degree in the region, and arc this in the ascensions of the region. What results will be the significator of the region. After this, take the sixth part of the remainder between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region, and multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle. What results will be the equation. If the significator of the direct circle is less than the significator of the region, add the equation to the significator of the direct circle. If it is more, subtract it from it. What remains there is where the direction will arrive from the circle of signs in the same year. If the significator is in the western half, do with the nadir of the significator's degree as you did with the significator's degree in the operation before it. What results there is where the direction will arrive from the circle of signs in the same year. The place to which the direction arrives is called the place of division, and the lord of the term of that place is called the divisor. If another planet or its rays or a place near it is in the degree of division, this planet or the lord of the rays is said to be a participant of the divisor in the division. The significators that are directed are five places: the degree of the ascendant, the degree of the Sun, the degree of the Moon, the degree of the Part of Fortune, and the degree of the Midheaven. The degree of the ascendant is directed to discern accidents that happen to the body. The degree of the Sun is for causes of dignity and exaltation, honor, and kingdom. The Moon is for the being of the soul and body and marriage. The Part of Fortune is for acquisitions and progress, scarcity and abundance. The Midheaven is for mastery and other particular dispositions and their being. If the ascendant of a revolution of any world years or nativities is directed, its significators are directed according to this direction, namely, one day for each degree. Some believe that the significators of the year are directed in this way for all: namely, 59 minutes and 8 seconds for one day. For the direction of kings and princes is directed to them from the degree of the Midheaven through the ascensions of the direct circle, 56 minutes and 8 seconds for one day, until it reaches good or bad planets. And the being of kings in health or illness is directed from the degree of the ascendant to good or bad planets, 59 minutes and 8 seconds for one day through the ascensions of the region. The direction in the revolution of world years and to predict the being of the common people or rustics is from the degree of the ascendant, similarly to predict the being of the king from the degree of the Midheaven. And in the revolution of nativity years, to predict the being of the native from the degree of the ascendant of the revolution, 59 minutes and 8 seconds for one day through the ascensions of the region. Concerning Algebugthar. The law of Algebugthar in nativities is the direction of the degree of the ascendant. This means that you look at the degree of the ascendant in whose term it is, and subtract the ascensions of the ascendant from the ascensions that are in the direct end of the planet's term through the ascensions of the region. For what remains, you take one year for each degree, and one month for every five minutes, and 6 days for every minute. The lord of the term will be the disposer of the years, which is called the divisor. After this, take the degrees of the term that succeeds it, and convert them also into degrees of ascensions. For what results, take one year for each degree, and one month for every 5 minutes, and six days for every minute. The lord of the term will be the divisor and disposer of those years. Similarly, you will enter with every term of the lord by succession until the end of life. If it is in the term of any planet, the planet or its rays will be participants in the division. This division is called Algebugthar. Concerning the Duodenaries of Planets and Houses. The law of the duodenaries of planets or houses means that you look at how much the planet has moved in its sign, in whatever sign it is, or the degree of the house you wish, in degrees and minutes. You will multiply this by 12. After this, add to it the degrees and minutes that you multiplied by 12. What is collected from it, project from the beginning of the degree of the same sign, giving 30 degrees to each sign. Where the number ends, there will be the duodenary of the planets and houses. Concerning their Novenaries. The law of Amanbabarat, which are the novenaries. The knowledge of this is to know how much the planet has moved in its sign in degrees and minutes, or the degree of the house whose novenary you wish to know. After this, divide the sign into nine divisions, and each division is three degrees and a third part of one degree. After this, look in which novenary out of the novenaries the degree of the planet or house falls. After this, give the first novenary from the signs to the lord of the movable sign of the same triplicity, and the second novenary to the lord of the sign of which it is itself.

[On the Terms of the Planets]
The terms or bounds of the planets in the signs are those where, in each sign, certain planets have terms arranged through different degrees. From the beginning of Aries up to the sixth degree of the same Aries is the term of Jupiter. From the sixth up to the twelfth is the term of Venus. From the twelfth up to the twentieth is the term of Mercury. From the twentieth to the twenty-fifth is the term of Mars and Saturn. Due to the diversity of their degrees and the difficulty of remembering them, we have described them in a table so that the work may be easier. The Egyptian terms are said to be these: 6 9 8 5 6 5 6 5 7 3 6 1 7 4 6 5 8 7 6 7 6 7 9 6 7 4 7 4 14 6 9 5 7 6 7 6 7 10 7 0 4 7 2 6 8 8 7 7 9 7 2 7 9 4 8 2 0 5 6 1 0 7 7 4 1 2 9 5 8 4 6 5 4 17 7 4 17 8 6 4 4 7 9 16 2 7 5 6 5 12 20 4 3 9 6 2.

[When Triplicities are Preferred to Terms]
Some prefer triplicities to terms because the lords of triplicities are stronger in nourishment, as they signify nourishment, and because there is no discord in a triplicity, as there is in terms when they are preferred. And some prefer terms to triplicities because the lords of terms are stronger in direction.

[On the Faces of the Signs and to Which Planets They are Attributed]
The faces of the signs are these: each sign is divided into three equal parts. Each part consists of ten degrees and is called a face, the beginning of which is from the first degree of Aries. Therefore, the first face is from the first degree of Aries up to the tenth, and it is given to Mars. The second up to the twentieth degree is given to the Sun, who succeeds him in the order of the circles. The third up to the end of the aforesaid sign is of Jupiter. Similarly, the first face of Taurus is of Mercury, who succeeds Venus, and so on to the end of the signs. Therefore, when you have a degree in any sign and wish to know to which planet's face it belongs, take the whole signs from the beginning of Aries up to the sign you wish to know about, and triple it. And what remains, add to what has passed from the faces of that sign about which you wish to know the face, with the same face whose lord you wish to know. And project from the planet who is the lord of the face of the sign of Aries, who is Mars, according to the succession of the circles. And what remains within seven, count from Mars according to the succession of the planets. And where the number ends, that will be the first face of that sign, from which the degree was, up to the tenth of that sign, of the planet at whom the number ends. And from the tenth up to the twentieth, of the other planet who succeeds him. And from the twentieth up to the end, of the other sign who succeeds him. And in whose tenth the degree is from the sign, that will be the face of that planet. The lords of these faces are also called decans by some, whose table follows: In Aries 10 Mars, 10 Sun, 10 Jupiter. In Taurus 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn. In Gemini 10 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 10 Sun. In Cancer 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn. In Leo 10 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 10 Sun. In Virgo 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn. In Libra 10 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 10 Sun. In Scorpio 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn. In Sagittarius 10 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 10 Sun. In Capricorn 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn. In Aquarius 10 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 10 Sun. In Pisces 10 Venus, 10 Mercury, 10 Saturn.

[On the Virtues of the Planets]
Since, by God's grace, we have now discussed the powers of the planets in the signs, which are their house, exaltation, triplicity, term, and face, let us now discuss their virtues or strengths within themselves. For the lord of the house has 5 strengths, the lord of the exaltation 4, the lord of the triplicity 3, the lord of the term 2, and the lord of the face 1. Understand, therefore, from these numbers the strengths of the planets. For those that abound more in number, abound more in strength. And some prefer the term to the triplicity, that is, they want the lord of the term to be stronger than the lord of the triplicity. But we have already explained above in what respect one is valid. Some also have given such a comparison concerning this matter, saying that when a planet is in its house, it is like a man in his own house and in his own dominion. And when it is in its exaltation, it is like a man in his kingdom and glory. And when it is in its term, it is like a man among his parents and relatives and people. And when it is in its triplicity, it will be like a man in his honor and among his helpers and ministers. And when it is in its face, it will be like a man in his magistracy. These are all the essential powers of the planets in the signs, and the figures of the signs follow these.

[On the Essences of the Signs and What They Signify in Themselves]
Among the signs, there are some signs that are called human, namely Virgo, Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, and the first half of Sagittarius, because their images in the circle are figured as images of humans. These are also called signs having beautiful voices. These are also strong when they are in the East. And some are said to have wings, namely Gemini, Virgo, and Pisces. And some are quadrupedal, like Leo and Sagittarius. Some of them are domestic, like Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn, and these are strong when they are in the South. But Virgo, Capricorn, and Aquarius are strong when they are in the North. And among the signs, some are entirely fruitful and some are vicious, namely Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Capricorn. And some of them are said to have many offspring, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And these are strong when they are in the West. And some of them are sterile, like Gemini, Leo, and Virgo. And some have few children, like Aries, Taurus, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Aquarius. And some are said to be very luxurious, namely Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn. And among the signs, some are said to have a medium voice and are formed in the images of bleating, lowing, and roaring animals, like Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn, and the last part of Sagittarius. And some are voiceless, namely those that are formed in the images of voiceless animals, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.

[On the Significations of the Signs]
Each sign has its own significations in what it signifies concerning the created members and customs of men, and regions, and seeds, and trees, and so on. Aries has from the body of man the head and face, and from regions, Babylon, and Syria, that is, Babylonia and Persia and Arabia and Philistia and Palestine. Taurus has trees that are planted, and from the body of man it has the neck and the knot of the throat, and from regions, Egypt and Almechim and Sande and Araterad. Gemini is a sign of a generous good spirit and has from the body of man the shoulders and arms and hands, and from regions, Vigeti and Armenia, Nutbrabige and Telenimstet, that is, Egypt and Bartha. Cancer has from trees those that are equal in length, and from the body of man the chest, heart, stomach, ribs, spleen, and lung, and from regions, Lesser Armenia and the eastern region of Buthabe and Masse and Acin, and it has participation in Barach and Atrabicen. Leo has tall trees, that is, long, hot, and cunning, and much distress and sadness, and from the body of man the stomach, heart, back, side, and from regions, Artitri up to the end of the habitable region. Virgo has whatever is sown from seeds, and is generous of good spirit, and has from the body of man the belly and internal parts, that is, the diaphragm and intestines, and from regions, arguments and Bum Moga Agility, Libra, that is, a certain region around Jerusalem and Alforas, that is, the Euphrates, and the island which is Hispania and Festiruel Aseum. Libra has tall trees and is generous of good spirit, and has from the body of man the loins and lower belly, navel, and groin, and genitals, hips, and buttocks, and from regions, the land of the Romans or Greeks and those adjacent to them up to Africa; it also has Arasse or Azim up to the end of Ethiopia and Barthan; it also has Carmen and Sesgestem and Thebes or Thebil and Tabrasten, Barab, and Ambarath. Scorpio has trees of equal length, generous of good spirit, and has from the body of man the genitals, testicles, bladder, anus, and thighs, and from regions, Belebiget and the lands of the Arabs and its borders up to Allegem; and it has participation in Alcbach. Sagittarius is ingenious and hot, has from the body of man the thighs, and from regions, Ethiopia and Maharabem and Achiut or Acenit or Achichit, which is India. Capricorn is of good life, irascible, cautious, and hot, having much sadness, has from the body of man the knees, and from regions, Ethiopia, Annaban, Alcon, and Acuith and Mahabem up to the two seas and Abant and Achuit, which is India. Aquarius has from the body of man the legs up to the lower ankles, that is, the heels, and from regions, Azenes, that is, blackness, and Althupha and its parts, and the land of Elfies and part of the land of Egypt and the western region and the land of Achiut. Pisces is hot and cautious, mixed with many colors, having from the body of man the feet; and from regions, Carabzarem and the northern region of the land of Jurjem and participation in the Romans up to Essen, it has an island and Egypt and Alexandria and the Lycian Sea.

[On the Signification of Planets in Signs by Members of the Body]
Indeed, when planets signify pain, they have a proper member in each sign. Let us therefore discuss the pains of the planets in the signs: and first let us begin with Aries. Saturn in Aries has the chest. Jupiter the belly. Mars the head. The Sun the thighs. Venus the feet. Mercury the legs. The Moon...

[On Pit Degrees]
In the signs there are certain degrees which are called pits: when a planet is in any of them, it is said to be in a pit, such as the sixth degree of Aries, etc., as will be shown in the following table. Aries: 6, 11, 16, 23, 29. Taurus: 8, 15, 21, 24, 25. Gemini: 2, 12, 17, 26. Cancer: 20, 30. Leo: 22, 23, 28. Virgo: 6, 12, 17, 23, 26. Libra: 8, 13, 15. Scorpio: 8, 13, 15, 21, 25. Sagittarius: 17, 20, 30. Capricorn: 9, 10, 22, 23, 27. Aquarius: 1, 17, 21, 25. Pisces: 12, 24, 27, 30.

[On Azemena Degrees (Debility of Body)]
There are in the signs certain degrees which are called Azemena degrees, that is, degrees of bodily debility. For Azemena signifies a temporary bodily debility, such as deafness, blindness, loss of limbs, and other such things which a person will have as long as they live, unless miraculously healed. Therefore, if the Moon is in these degrees at the birth of a child, the aforesaid Azemena will befall him, according to the signification of the place and aspect or places of the planets. Azemena also signifies various things in different ways, as you will find in books of nativities. The Azemena degrees are those described in this table. Aries: 8, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Taurus: 1, 19, 29. Gemini: 1, 7, 8, 18, 19. Cancer: 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Leo: 6, 20, 27, 28, 29. Virgo: 18, 19. Libra: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Scorpio: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Sagittarius: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Capricorn: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Aquarius: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Pisces: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

[On Degrees Increasing Fortune]
In this circle there are certain degrees which are said to increase fortune, which are described in this table. Aries: 8, 18, 27, 28. Taurus: 1, 2, 3, 15, 27. Gemini: 5, 13, 15. Cancer: 21. Leo: 7, 18, 20. Virgo: 13, 20. Libra: 19. Scorpio: 1, 2, 3, 4, 15. Sagittarius: 5, 7, 13, 14, 20. Capricorn: 12, 13, 14, 20. Aquarius: 7, 16, 17, 20. Pisces: 13, 20.

[On Compatible Degrees]
Two degrees which are of the same longitude from the beginning of the cardinal signs are called compatible, that is, of equal strength and consonant or participating in virtue. For example, the 20th degree of Capricorn or Cancer with the 10th degree of Sagittarius or Gemini; the 20th degree of Aries or Libra with the 10th degree of Pisces or Leo.

[On the Accidental Circle]
Having, with God's help, brought forth all that pertains to the essential circle of the signs, we now turn to the accidental. For the circle is figured at every hour in such a way that it is divided into four parts, which the circle of the hemisphere and the circle of the meridian (that is, the circle of the midheaven) divide, which makes the mid-day. And each of these parts is divided into three unequal parts according to the ascensions of the ascending signs. And in this way the circle is divided into twelve parts which are called houses, and are also named cusps and towers, the work of which is explained in the book of Ezibi, that is, in the book of the course of the stars. The beginning of the division is also the horoscope, that is, the ascendant, whose beginning is above the circle of the eastern hemisphere. Then the second house follows, and the third, and the rest of the houses up to the twelfth. The fourth part, which is from the ascendant to the midheaven, which is the twelfth, eleventh, and tenth house, is called the eastern masculine fourth part, and arriving, it signifies the beginning of life, and is called childish, sanguine, vernal. And the other part, which is from the midheaven to the degree of the western sign, that is, the seventh, which is above the circle of the western hemisphere, which is the ninth, eighth, and seventh house, and is meridian, feminine, receding, signifies middle age, and is called truly youthful, aestival, choleric. The third part, which is from the west to the degree of the fourth house, which is above the meridian circle under the earth, which is the sixth, fifth, and fourth house, is western, masculine, arriving, signifies the end of life, and is called autumnal, melancholic, and is senile and of middle age. The fourth part, which is from the fourth house to the ascendant, which is the third, second, and ascendant house, is northern, feminine, receding, signifies what happens to a person after his death and to what his body will come, or his disposition concerning the dismissed substance, or what will be said of him, namely whether he will be praised or blamed. This part is called senile, phlegmatic, defective, hibernal. And those two parts which are from the midheaven to the ascendant, and from the ascendant to the fourth house, this half is called the ascending half. And the remaining parts which are from the fourth house to the seventh, and thence to the midheaven, are called the descending half. And whatever is above the earth of the circle, that is, that upper part of the circle, is called the right. And what is under the earth, that is, that lower part, is called the left. And the ascendant, and the fourth, and the seventh, and the tenth are called Alamed, that is, what we call angles, so that it sounds more beautiful. And the second house, the eighth, the fifth, and the eleventh are called succedent to the angles. But the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth are called cadent from the angles. Therefore, when a planet is in the angles or its succedents, it is said to be effective. And if it is in the cadent houses from the angles, it is said to be defective. And each of these houses signifies something concerning the existence of men.

[On the Houses and Their Significations]
The first house, whose beginning rises in the circle of the eastern hemisphere, is called Athale, that is, the ascendant. This signifies the body and life and the beginnings of actions in interrogations, and speech and rumor, and whatever the querent thinks in his mind. It signifies the beginnings of life. And Alendezgod said that in nativities, the lord of the first triplicity of the ascendant signifies the life and nature of the native or querent, and his delight and will, and what he loves, and what he hates, and what good or evil will befall him in the beginning of his life. And the second lord of the triplicity signifies life and body and virtue or strength and the middle of life. And the third lord of the triplicity signifies that which his companions have signified for him, and signifies the end of life in death. The second house is the house of substance and sustenance and ministers and helpers, and signifies the end of the years of life, that is, the end of youth. And Alendezgod said concerning the lords of the triplicity of this house, the first, second, and third, see which of them is stronger, and you will rightly make him the author and significator of acquisition, for if he is in the midheaven, he will find a king, and if he is in the house of faith or trust, it is better. Similarly, the first lord of the triplicity gives substance in the beginning of life, and the second in the middle of life, and the third at its end. The third house is of brothers and sisters and relatives and loved ones, of faith and religion, of commands and legates, of changes and minor journeys, and signifies the existence of life before death. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the house of brothers, the first signifies older brothers, the second middle ones, the third younger ones, and their dignity and their existence according to their places. The fourth house is of fathers, inheritances, the end of things, treasures, and all hidden and secret things. It signifies the end of human life. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the house of fathers, the first signifies fathers, the second cities and lands, the third the ends of things and prisons. The fifth house is of children and loves, of legates and gifts, and signifies what will be after death, namely praise and blame. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the house of children, the first signifies children and life, the second love, the third legates. The sixth house is of infirmities and servants, and signifies the end of life and what will happen before old age. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the house of infirmities, the first signifies infirmities and recovery from infirmities and from evils and deteriorations. The second signifies eyes and servants. The third signifies what will happen from them and their utility and works. And it is the significator of beasts and cattle, and all quadrupeds, of their strength and their multitude, and also their death in his hand or their departure from it, that is, from the hand, and also of prison and detention. The seventh house is of women, marriages, contentions, and partnerships and oppositions, and signifies the middle of the end of life towards old age. Alendezgod said that the lord of the triplicity of the seventh house, the first signifies women, the second contentions, the third mixtures and partnerships. The eighth house is of death. It signifies fear and death and Almauerith, that is, the substances or inheritances of the dead which the heirs ought to possess after their death, and it signifies the years of life if...

[Significations of Angular Lords]
through causes of medicine and astronomy, and through spiritual and similar works, and it signifies through its presence in the tenth house, through agreements and negotiations, and through wives, and through the king's causes. The presence of the lord of the fourth house signifies fortune from cultivation of the land and its fruit, through the causes of fathers and ancient things, and through its presence in the ascendant it signifies fortune from cultivation of the land and its fruit, through ingenuity and depth of counsel; and its presence in the tenth house signifies profit from cultivation of the land and its fruit, through the causes of the king and magistracies. And its presence in the seventh house signifies fortune from cultivation of the land and its fruit, through the causes of wives and fates, and through negotiations. These are signified by the lords of the angles through their presence in their angles. Similarly, therefore, you will do concerning the presence of the lords of the other houses; and therefore we have introduced only the lords of the angles so that it might be an example for the others.

[How to Know the Dominant Planet]
When you wish to know the planet that dominates a matter, look at which planet has the most authority in the house of the matter and the planet that signifies the nature of that matter, as we will say in the natures of the planets. Therefore, see which of the planets is stronger in the house of the matter and what part it has of the strengths we have mentioned, that is, from the number we mentioned when we discussed the strength and power of the planets, and whichever is strongest of all in the place of the matter, that will be its dominator. For example, if the question is about substance and you wish to know who its dominator is, and the second house, which signifies substance, is the fifth degree of the sign of Aries: because it is the house of Mars, Mars has five strengths in this place; the exaltation of the Sun is there, and it has four strengths in it. It is also the Sun's triplicity, and it has three strengths there. Therefore, the Sun has seven strengths there. And it is the term of Jupiter, and it has two strengths there. And it is also the face of Mars, and it has one strength there. Therefore, Mars has six strengths there: five from the house and one from the face; and the Sun has seven. And such a planet is called Almubta, that is, conquering. Therefore, the Sun takes precedence there, because it has seven strengths there, and it dominates there in the house of substance. Similarly, you will take into account the place of the part of substance and the part of fortune, and you will make Jupiter, who is naturally the significator of substance, a participant in them, and you will combine the testimonies of the parts and the planets; and you will do the same for all the houses to know their dominator.

[Accidental Powers of Planets]
Among the accidental powers of the planets is Albais, that is, similarity; and this is when a diurnal planet is above the earth by day and below the earth by night, and a nocturnal planet is above the earth by night and below the earth by day. And if this is a masculine planet in a masculine sign, and a feminine planet in a feminine sign, it is said to be in its similarity, that is, in its Albais. And its strength will be like the strength of a man in its perfect place of acquisition and fortune. The second difference in the natures of the seven planets, and what is proper to them, and what they signify concerning the essence of things. And since, with God's help, we have now completed what we proposed to discuss concerning the circle of the signs and its accidents, let us now pursue the intention of the seven planets and their natures, what they have in common, and what they signify.

[Nature and Significations of Saturn]
Saturn is masculine, malefic, diurnal, and is the significator of fathers if the child's nativity is at night; and it signifies ultimate old age if it is occidental; and the beginning of old age if it is oriental; and it signifies gravity, coldness, and dryness; and from the complexion of bodies, melancholic; and its increase and distillation. And perhaps it will sometimes be a cold, humid, ponderous, and fetid complexion; and much eating and true affection; and it signifies depth of counsel; and much silence; and from magistracies, ancient and precious things; and it signifies cultivation of fields and population of lands and rivers if it is fortunate; and vile and laborious things if it is malefic, such as friction in baths, fullers, and sailors. And if it is fortunate, it will be of true affection, spacious, and patient. And if it is malefic, it will be indiscreet, stable, sad, and sorrowful, of evil suspicion, very suspicious, and moving people to whisperings. And if it is fortunate, it signifies from substance ancient and durable things, and inheritances, and cultivation of land; if it is malefic, it signifies dirty waters and bad-tasting, old, and convertible things. And from infirmities, phlegmatic and melancholic and viscous and congealed acute diseases, such as leprosy, morphea, gout, and cancers and other such things; and it signifies long journeys, prisons, and bonds, also labor and slowness, and affliction, and almauerith, that is, the substances of the dead; also fathers and grandfathers and older brothers, eunuchs, servants, and vile men; and it signifies from works the works of skins if it is the sole significator without the complexion of any other planets. If Jupiter is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of parchment on which divine books are written. And if Mars is conjoined with it, it signifies shoe soles and their preparations. And if the Sun is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of shoemakers. And if Venus is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of skins from which drums and other instruments we use in games are made. And if Mercury is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of skins on which testaments and payrolls are written. And if the Moon is conjoined with it, it signifies the preparation of skins of wild animals and mountain animals and similar things; and it signifies from sects that which confesses unity if it is fortunate; if it is malefic, it signifies belief in unity with much hesitation, that is, doubt. And Messahala, whom God wished to exalt, who was an astrologer very clear in judgments, said: why is it said that it signifies the Jewish faith? Because it is among the most ancient, and all confess it, and it no other; thus Saturn, to whom all are joined, and he to none; it also signifies black garments. And some others said that Saturn signifies the inner parts of the ear and the spleen, and the stomach; and it has blackness from colors; and from tastes, astringent and sour. And from days, Saturday; and from nights, that which precedes Wednesday. And the quantity of its orb is nine degrees. And the years of its firdaria are eleven, the greatest 465, and the greater 57, and the middle 43 and a half, the lesser 30. Its strength in the regions of the circle is to the right of the north. And Messahala said that it signifies among human figures a man between black and yellow, who, when he walks, casts his eyes to the ground, ponderous in gait, joining his feet, and thin, stooped, having small eyes, and dry skin, veiny, having a sparse beard on his jaws, thick lips, cunning, ingenious, seducer, killer. And Dorotheus said that this signifies a very hairy man with joined eyebrows; and it has from regions Alcina and India and all the land of the blacks. And from parts, it has the part of strength and stability; and it signifies lands or things of lands and inheritances; and those who work in works and audacity and labor, ingenuity and causes of death; and it has from the parts of the world Achid and Alchint and their confines and the lands of the blacks and their mountains.

[Nature and Significations of Jupiter]
Jupiter is fortunate, masculine, diurnal; and it is the significator of substance and produces temperate heat and humidity, airy, sanguine; and from ages, it signifies youth up to the perfection of age; and from magistracies that pertain to law, such as judging just judgments, and bringing peace among men, and striving for good things; and it signifies abundance of substance; and from negotiations, those that are done without deception; and it signifies soul and life, joy and truth and religion and patience and every beautiful and precious precept and abundance of Venus; and from infirmities that arise from blood by an increase of quantity that is not superfluous beyond nature, nor from vitiated and convertible blood; and it is the planet of wisdom and intellect and use. To whom if Saturn is conjoined, it signifies necromancy and incantations and exorcisms. And if Mars is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of medicine. And if the Sun is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of sects and prudence in contentions and disputes. And if Venus is conjoined with it, it signifies the composition of sounds and other delightful sciences. And if Mercury is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of arithmetic and writing; also astronomy and philosophy and geometry. And if the Moon is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of disposition.

[Venus: Feminine, Nocturnal, Cold and Humid]
Venus, a feminine, nocturnal fortune, signifies women, wives, and mothers if the nativity is diurnal. She operates with temperate coldness and humidity. From age, she signifies youth or adolescence. From crafts, she signifies instruments of games, ornaments, beautiful figures, games of dice and chess, dances, idleness, fornication and fornicators, and children of fornication, and a multitude of coitus, and all kinds of luxury, and the composition and use of crowns, and beauty and cleanliness of clothing and ornaments. Gold and silver, affection, games, laughter and joy, and the use of ointments and various spices, drinks and intoxications. She believes in all those she gives generously to, and signifies affection, diligence, love, justice, and houses of prayer, which she holds faithfully. She signifies the mastery of all signs, such as music, etc. If Saturn aspects her, she signifies the sound of songs with which the dead are sometimes lamented, or which builders sing when they build edifices. And if Jupiter aspects her, she signifies the sound of readings or songs which the lords of sects use in their altars and places of prayer in praise of Almighty God. And if Mars signifies the sounds which secular people use, and vulgar songs in which there is mention of blasphemy or battles, or in which there is mention of prison or labor and similar things, such as a song in which there is mention of capture and binding and the striking of whips. If the Sun signifies the sound of wood with which one sings before kings and nobles. If Mercury, the sound that is exercised in the composition of verses. And if the Moon signifies the songs of sailors in ships. And from infirmities, she has cold and humid diseases which occur especially and often in the genital members. And from substance, that which is acquired for beauty, such as women's ornaments, and their clothes, pearls and paintings. And from the quality of the soul, sweetness and friendship, and eating and familiar things, and desires for drinking and eating and coitus. And from sects, the worship of idols, and those in whom eating and drinking are most practiced. And some have said that she signifies the hips and the spine, the back and sperm. And others have said that she signifies fat and fleshy parts in the vulva, uterus, belly, groin, and navel. And from colors, she has whiteness; and from tastes, oiliness. And the quantity of her orb is 7 degrees. And she has from days, the day of Venus; and from nights, the night of Mars. And the years of her firdaria are eight. And her greater years are 82, greatest 152, middle 45, but lesser 8. Her strength in the regions of the circle is to the right of the east. And Masha'allah said that she signifies, from the figures of men, a white man inclining to blackness, of beautiful body and hair, having a round face, and having a small jaw, beautiful eyes, and the blackness of her eyes is more than it should be. And Dorotheus said that she signifies a man with a beautiful face, beautiful eyes, and much hair, and more white, mixed with redness, fat, showing benevolence. And she has from parts, the part of desire, and signifies friendship and play and affection and patience and conjunctions of males. And she has from the parts of the world, Albiget and Aliemen and the lands of the Arabs.

[Mercury: Mixed, Masculine, Diurnal]
Mercury, mixed, masculine, diurnal, inclines by his nature to that which he aspects from the planets and from the signs. He signifies younger brothers, and signifies servants and the affection of concubines. He also signifies divinity and the oracles of prophets, and credulity, and work and honor or prayer. If he is in his own nature and no planet aspects him, he signifies earthly things and the augmentation of things by growth. And from age, youth, and perfection in it. And from works, works that generate knowledge, preaching, rhetoric, negotiations, estimation, and geometry, and the disposition of things, and philosophy, and auguries, and proverbs, and writing, and the science of versification, and especially the work of numbers. If Saturn aspects him, he signifies from the work of numbers, the work of measuring lands and inheritances, and the number of buildings and looms. If Jupiter, he signifies the number of prayers and the number of divine books. If Mars, he signifies the number that is in the gifts of armies and fighters, and the number of blows of whips and clubs. If the Sun, he signifies presiding over the number of kings and the substance of houses. If Venus, he signifies the number of strings of wood or citharas, the number of sounds and pipes. If the Moon, he signifies the number of dishes that are made for the meals of travelers outside the house. And he signifies from infirmities, spiritual infirmities of the soul, i.e., horrible thoughts, and restlessness of mind and doubts and other similar things. He also signifies the quality of the soul and similar things, his complexion and conjunction. When he is fortunate, there will be good things according to the kind of fortune that makes him fortunate, and according to the place in which Mercury is fortunate. And when he is unfortunate, there will be iniquities according to the evil that makes him unfortunate, and according to the place in which he became unfortunate. And he signifies from sects, the worship of unity and similar things, and this secretly with hypocrisy and simulation. And some have said that he signifies the thighs, navel, and groin, and legs, nerves, and veins. And from colors, he has every mixed and varied color, and the color of the wild lily flower. And from tastes, sourness. And the quantity of his orb is 7 degrees. And he has from days, the day of Mercury; and from nights, the night of Sunday. The years of his firdaria are 9. And his greater years are 76, greatest 460, middle 48, but lesser 20. His strength in the regions of the circle is in the north. And some have said that Mercury from the middle of his retrogradation until the second station signifies childhood; and from the second station until the conjunction of the Sun, youth; and from the conjunction of the Sun until the first station, middle age; and from his first station until the middle of retrogradation, he signifies old age and contrariety in his conjunction through direct motion until the first station, he signifies affection and friendship and imitations of love; and from his second station going to conjunction, he signifies the inquiry of affection and concord; and from his first station going again to retrogradation, he signifies the inquiry of contrariety and dissimulation, slowness and little shame, and occupation and stupor in things; and in the middle of retrogradation, he signifies temperate swiftness because of the weakness of ingenuity. And at the second station, he signifies stupor and occupation of ingenuity and slowness, and the egress from this, swiftness and the opening of ingeniousness.

[Mercury's Conjunctions and Figures]
His conjunction with the Sun through direct motion signifies the swiftness and passion of ingeniousness and their breadth or augmentation. Similarly, it happens to Venus in these places and to the higher planets. And Masha'allah said that Mercury signifies, from the figures of men, a man not very white nor black in color, having an elevated and long forehead, length in the face and a long nose, having a sparse beard on the jaws and beautiful eyes not entirely black, having long fingers. And from parts, he has the part of negotiation; he signifies fear, infestation, and war and enmities and seductions and contrarieties; he also signifies perfect mastery and subtlety in work and inquiry, and in other things that happen among men from deeds and contentions. And from lands, he has Adelech, Alquidem, and especially in the south, the lands of the Indians. The Moon, a feminine, nocturnal fortune, operates coldness and humidity. She is the significator of mothers if the nativity is nocturnal, and in her there is a false temperate quality, and she signifies childhood and the beginning of growth. And from works, she has embassies and messages, and works of waters and lands according to the quantity of fortune or misfortune or evil, so that if she is good, she signifies good, and vice versa. She also signifies principality if she presides or is the mistress of some things pertaining to the king, if she is fortunate with the Sun in a good aspect and in a good place. And from substance, she signifies silver and cultivated land if she has authority in the fourth house, and from faith, religion. And from infirmities, epilepsy, paralysis, gout, falling sickness, facial distortion, disarticulation of limbs, and commotion; and whatever is similar to coldness and humidity. And the quality of the soul, her conjunction with the planets. If she aspects

[Planetary States in Themselves and Mutually]
The third difference is in what happens to the seven planets in themselves and what happens to them mutually. Since, by the grace of God, we have already discussed the state of the planets in themselves and what they signify, let us proceed to narrate what happens to them in themselves and mutually, that is, from some to some. The signification of the planets in themselves is that if a planet is ascending in the circle of its apogee, it is lesser in light, magnitude, and speed, that is, when there are less than 90 degrees between it and its apogee, either before or after. If there are exactly 90 degrees between it and its apogee, it will be equal in light, magnitude, and speed. But if it is outside these two places, i.e., more than 90 degrees, it will be descending from the circle of the apogee and will appear greater in light and magnitude and swifter in speed. If its portion is equal to less than 180 degrees, it will be increasing in number. And if it is more, it will be decreasing in number. And if its portion is equal to 180 degrees or 360 degrees, it will neither increase nor decrease. And if the equation added to the mean course is called increasing the course or number, and if its equation is decreased, it is called decreasing the number. And when any of the three superior planets goes more than its mean course, it is said to increase the course; and if it goes less, it is said to decrease the course; and if it goes just as much, it is said to be equal in course. When any of the inferior planets goes more than the mean course of the Sun, it will be increasing the course. When it goes less, it is said to be decreasing the course; and when it goes just as much, it will be equal in course. The state of the luminaries in their course is like the state of the three superior planets. A planet is also northern when it crosses its genzabar, that is, when it crosses the path of the Sun going from south to north. That transit, that is, that intersection of circles, is called genzabar. Therefore, when a planet has crossed that intersection and there are less than 90 degrees between the planet and that intersection, the planet will be ascending northern. When it is from 90 to 180 degrees, it will be descending northern. When it has passed this number, that is, when it has more, going to 270 degrees, it will be descending southern. And when it has passed this number, going to 360 degrees, it will be ascending southern. This is the state of the planets in themselves. Let us now discuss the state of the planets mutually, that is, what happens to the five planets with respect to the luminaries. And we will say from this what Ptolemy said about almuten, that is, about seeing each other face to face. This is when it is between a planet and the Sun, while the planet is occidental, that is, while it follows the Sun, as much as is between the house of that planet and the house of the Sun in signs. Or when it is between that planet and the Moon, when it is oriental from the Moon, that is, while it succeeds the Moon, as much as is between the house of the planet and the house of the Moon in signs. That is, when the planet is as distant from the Sun as its house is distant from the Sun's house. Similarly, it is said of the Moon: when a planet succeeds the Sun and Saturn is 6 signs from the Sun, Jupiter 5, Mars 4, Venus 3, Mercury 2, then it is said to be in the almuten of the Sun. Similarly, when this number of signs for each planet is between any planet and the succeeding Moon, it is said to be in the almuten of the Moon. The security of a planet, that is, that a planet is in its hayz, that is, in its proper part and in one of the angles of the ascendant and one of the luminaries; similarly in a place similar to it in the quadrant, namely in an angle, so that the planet is oriental from the Sun by day, occidental from the Moon by night. And every planet is said to be in its security by some when there are 60 degrees between the oriental planet and the Sun. And every planet, from when it is covered by the Sun's rays until it appears from under the rays, is called combust. And when it begins to enter the rays, it is said to have begun to be combust. And when it is hidden under the rays and is near the Sun by 12 degrees, it is called oppressed. And when it is with the Sun in one degree, and there are 16 minutes or less between them, and its latitude is similar, it is called united. And when it has passed that union, seeking exit until it is seen, it is called escaped. And from when the three superior planets appear from under the rays and begin to rise, that is, appear in the morning before the Sun, this is when they are closer to the circle of the eastern hemisphere until they come to opposition, they are called oriental dextrous. And from when they have passed opposition until they conjunct the Sun again, they are called occidental sinister. Venus and Mercury, from when either of them separates from the degrees of the Sun in the middle of its retrogradation and appears until they are combust by the Sun in their direct motion, are called oriental. And from when they separate from the Sun in the middle of their direct motion until they are combust again in their retrogradation, they are called occidental. And when they are in their rising, that is, when they are oriental, they are called dextrous and direct masculine. And in their setting, that is, when they are occidental, they are called sinister and direct feminine. And then they are stronger. The three superior planets, after they emerge from under the Sun's rays, are called oriental and are said to increase in strength up to 30 degrees from the Sun. And after that, up to another 30 degrees, they are called strong or stronger oriental. And when they have passed the Sun by 60 degrees, they are called oriental planets going to debility until they come to retrogradation. Then they are called oriental retrograde until they are in opposition. And after this, they will be occidental retrograde when they have passed opposition until they come to direct motion. Then from direct motion up to 60 degrees after direct motion, until their longitude from the Sun is 30 degrees, they are called strong occidental. Then from a longitude of 60 degrees after direct motion, they are called occidental going to debility. Then they become weak occidental until they enter under the Sun's rays. The inferior planets, from when they separate from the Sun, and they are retrograde, are called weak oriental. They do not cease to be so until they come to their direct motion. And then they become strong oriental until their longitude from the Sun is like the Sun's longitude from them when they began to weaken going to retrogradation. Then they become weak oriental until they are under the Sun's rays. After this, they are conjunct. Then combust, going to appearance until they are seen. And from when they separate from the Sun in direct motion up to 60 degrees, they are stronger. And from 60 degrees up to the time of their retrogradation, they will be strong occidental. And as long as they are with the Sun, they will be weak. When a planet has emerged from under the Sun's rays and is not joined to any other planet, it is said to be in its own light. This is the state of the planets with the luminaries.

[Planetary Aspects and Conjunctions]
Regarding what happens to planets in relation to each other. Their relation to each other is conjunction, that is, when two planets are in two aspecting signs, and the lighter planet is in its sign with fewer degrees than the heavier planet in its sign, and there are 6 degrees or less between them, then it is said that the lighter planet goes to the conjunction of the heavier one. And when their degrees are equal, their conjunction is perfected. When it passes it, it will be separated from it. This conjunction is called a conjunction of longitude. A conjunction of latitude is when two planets are joined by latitude. And if there is an application of conjunction, their latitude must be equal in one part. And if there is a conjunction by opposition, their latitudes must be equal, so that the latitude of one is ascending in the north and the other descending in the north, or one ascending in the south and the other descending in the south. Or if there is an application from any other aspect, this means that the latitude of one is northern ascending and the other southern descending, and vice versa in the south. And this is the application of latitude that has been mentioned. And when one planet separates from another and is not joined to any other planet as long as it is in the same sign, it is called void of course. And when a planet is in a sign and no other planet aspects this sign, as long as it is in the same sign, it is called feral or wild. And when a lighter planet separates from a heavier planet and is joined to another, it transfers the nature of the first to the second. A planet also transfers nature in another way, that is, when a lighter planet joins a heavier planet, and that heavier planet in turn joins another heavier planet, then it better transfers the nature of the lighter to the heavier. If, however, one of these is not joined to the other, but each is joined to another, then if that third planet aspects any place in the circle, it returns their light to that place. This is called the return of light. Again, if one planet is not joined to another, but a third planet transfers light to both, then this conjunction is also called the return of light. Prohibition follows and occurs in two ways. One, namely, by conjunction, when there are three planets in one sign, but in different degrees, and the heavier one has more degrees, then the one in the middle prohibits the former, that is, the one with fewer degrees, from joining the heavier one until it passes it. In the second way, two planets are in one sign, and the lighter one joins the heavier one; another also joins the same heavier one by aspect. Therefore, the one who is with it in one sign prohibits the aspecting one from conjunction with the heavier one, if, however, the degrees of the one who joins and the one who aspects are equal, that is, of the same number. But if the one who aspects is closer to the degree of the heavier one, the conjunction will be of the aspecting one. And if a planet joins the lord of the sign in which it is, or the lord of exaltation, or the lord of other dignities in which it is, it is said to pulsate, that is, to send the nature of that planet, the lord, that is, of the same dignity, to it. And if a planet is in any of its dignities and is joined to another planet that also has a part of dignity in the same place, it also sends both its nature, namely, and that of the one to which it is joined. This entire sending is called alchobol, that is, reception.

[Return of Light and Refrenation]
Now follows the return, that is, when a planet joins another planet that is combust, that is, under the sun's rays, or is retrograde, it returns its virtue due to its weakness, which it cannot retain. Then, if both planets are in an angle or succeeding angles, the return will be with profit. Similarly, if the one joining it is only in an angle, and the one to whom it joins has received it. But if the planet joining is cadent from an angle, and the one to whom it joins is in an angle or in a succeeding angle, or if both are cadent, the return will be with detriment. Now follows almenē, that is, refrenation, which occurs when a planet wants to join another, but before it joins, retrogradation occurs, and thus its conjunction is destroyed.

[Alichorad and Alfazim]
Now follows alichorad, that is, accidental contrariety. This occurs when a lighter planet has many degrees in a sign, and another, heavier one, has fewer degrees, and a third, lighter than the first, wanting to join the heavier one, but before it joins it, that lighter one which has more degrees becomes retrograde and joins and applies to that heavier one. And passing it, it also joins another lighter planet, and thus the conjunction of the former with the heavier one is destroyed. Now follows alfazim, that is, frustration. This occurs when a planet seeks the conjunction of another planet, but before it reaches it, this one changes into another sign, and there will be some planet in few degrees aspecting that sign, and its rays will be at the beginning of the sign. When the succeeding planet leaves the first sign, it joins this aspecting one, and the conjunction it had with that one, that is, with the first, is annulled.

[Abscission of Light]
Now follows the abscission of light. This is when a planet seeks the conjunction of another, and is in the second sign from the sign of the one to which another planet joins, but before it joins it, the one in the second sign becomes retrograde. It joins it and cuts off its light from the planet that wanted to join it. Similarly, if a planet is going to the conjunction of another planet, and that other planet to which it wants to join seeks the conjunction of another planet heavier than itself, but before the lighter one reaches the degrees of the heavier one, the heavier one joins another heavier than itself, and cuts off its light from the first lighter planet.

[Fortunate and Unfortunate Places]
Regarding fortunate and unfortunate places. There are also places for these planets in which they are strengthened and in which they are weakened: places in which fortunes occur, and places in which misfortunes occur. But the places in which fortunes occur are these: that they are in good aspects, that is, in some useful aspect, that is, a sextile, or in a trine aspect, which by some is called hexagonal radiation and trigonal; and that the malefics are cadent from them, and are separated from misfortune, and joined to fortune; or are besieged by fortunes or their rays, that is, that they are between two fortunes or between the rays of fortunes. For this is obsession, that a planet has fortune or its rays.

[Planetary Fortification and Debilitation]
before it, or another benefic or its rays behind it. And some call this elevation, that is, veneration: or they are united with the Sun in one degree: or they are in its sextile aspect: or trine or similar aspect of the Moon, and the Moon is then fortunate: and they are swift in course, augmented in light and number: or they are in their dignities, as in their own terms, that is, in their own likeness, so that a masculine planet is in a masculine sign: and a feminine planet in a feminine sign, and a diurnal planet in the day above the earth and in the night below the earth, a nocturnal planet in the night above the earth and in the day below the earth, and the rest, and that they are in signs in which they have dignities or their powers: or in their joys, or in bright degrees received: and from their strength it is that they are ascending in the north: or they are northern: or they are ascending in the circle of their apogee: or in the second station, that is, those which are in the station where they are directed from retrogradation: or they are emerging from under the Sun's rays: or they are in an angle: or in its succedent: or they are three degrees higher and oriental from the Sun: if the Sun aspects them with a sextile: or trine aspect, this will be an increase of strength for them: or they are in masculine quarters and the Sun, when it is in those masculine quarters: or in masculine signs, it will also be strong unless it is in Libra: because there it falls. And from the strength of the three inferior planets it is that they are occidental from the Sun: or in feminine quarters, and from the strength of the Moon: that it is in the night above the earth and in the day below the earth in a feminine place; or in a feminine sign: and when it is in the exaltation of the Sun. Concerning the misfortune of the planets. Indeed, concerning the misfortune of the planets and their destruction, it is that they are in conjunction with malefics: or in opposition to them: or in their square: or trine: or sextile radiation: or if there is between them a malefic body or its rays less than the term of the planet: or they are in the terms of malefics: or their houses: or malefics are elevated above them from the 10th or 11th places, and much worse if they do not receive them. Or they are in conjunction with the Sun: or its opposition: or in square radiation: or it is in the heads of their genitures: or with their tails: or with the head of the Dragon or the tail, or there are between them and any of these, namely, places, 22 degrees or less: and especially if the Moon is in any of them: similarly, the Sun is then more hindered by them, that is, by the head or tail when they are between it and one of them, even 4 degrees before or behind: or the planets are besieged between two malefics: this is that the planet is in some sign and with it a malefic: or its rays before it, and a malefic or its rays behind it: or it is separated from a malefic by conjunction: or by aspect: and is joined in such a way to another malefic: or a malefic: or its rays are in the sign which is before it: that is, in the second from it: and in the sign which is after it: that is, in the 12th from it, there is another malefic: or its rays. Similarly, it is said of signs that they are besieged. But if a benefic or the Sun aspects the same besieged planet: or besieged sign from a trine: or from a sextile aspect, and there is between it and the conjunction less than seven degrees, that malice or siege is dissolved. And from this, that the planet is retrograde.

[Planetary Debilities and Affections]
or combust under the Sun's rays, or falling from the ascendant, or from their debility, so that they are slow in course, or in their first station, that is, when they stand still to become retrograde, or are in dark degrees, or are masculine in feminine signs and feminine degrees by day under the earth, and by night above the earth; or are feminine in masculine signs and masculine degrees by night under the earth, and by day above the earth; or are in opposition to their dignities or powers; or descending in the south or meridian; or falling from the angles, or from the succedent houses of the angles; or in cadent houses; or are in the via combusta, which is the last half of Libra and the first half of Scorpio; or are joined to a retrograde, impeded, or cadent planet; or are not received. Or if the three superior planets are occidental, or in feminine quarters. And the debility of the Sun is to be in feminine signs, or in feminine quarters, unless it is in the ninth house. And the debility of the three inferior planets is to be oriental, or in masculine quarters. Concerning the friendship and hatred of the planets. It is said among the planets that some of them love and hate each other. For concerning those who love, some of the ancients said that Jupiter loves all planets and is their friend, and they are his, except Mars. The friends of Venus are all planets, and all love her except Saturn. The friends of Saturn are Jupiter, Sun, and Moon, and his enemies are Mars and Venus, and she hates him more. And the friend of Mars is Venus, and the other planets hate him, and Jupiter and Sun more. The friends of the Sun are Jupiter and Venus, and his enemies are Mars, Mercury, and Moon. The friends of Mercury are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn only, and his enemies are Sun, Moon, and Mars. The friends of the Moon are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, and her enemies are Mars and Mercury. The friends of the Dragon's Head are Jupiter and Venus, and his enemies are Saturn and Mars. The friends of the Tail are Saturn and Mars, and his enemies are Sun, Moon, Jupiter, and Venus. And there are other kinds of enmity: when two planets have their houses opposite, like Mars and Venus, and when they conjoin, it is called the opening of the gates. The third kind of enmity is when the exaltations of two planets are opposite. The stronger friendship of planets is when a planet agrees with another planet in nature, quality, substance, and power, just as Mars agrees with the Sun, because both agree in heat, dryness, sharpness, and swiftness; he is the lord of his exaltation in which his strength appears. And just as the Moon agrees with Venus in coldness and humidity, and she is the lady of her exaltation. But when two planets agree in nature and substance, like Jupiter and Venus, they are friends.

[Astrological Terms and Conjunctions]
Fourth difference in the exposition of astrological names. Let us now proceed with the exposition of astrological names. The beginning of these is the conjunctions signifying destructions or changes that occur in this world from conjunctions, the number of which is six. The greatest of all conjunctions is the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter at the beginning of Aries, and this occurs every 960 years. The second conjunction of these is at the beginning of each triplicity, and this occurs every 240 years. For they conjoin twelve times in each triplicity, and perhaps they make 13 conjunctions in each triplicity; then their conjunction changes to the triplicity that succeeds this one. The third conjunction is of Saturn and Mars at the beginning of Cancer, which occurs every 30 years. The fourth is the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in each sign, which occurs every 20 years. The fifth is the descent of the greater luminary at the point of the vernal equinox, that is, the Sun's ingress into the head of Aries, which occurs every year. The sixth is the conjunction of the luminaries and their opposition, which occurs in the middle of each lunar month. And when the ascendant of the conjunction is mentioned, it means or signifies the ascendant of the world, that is, the sign that ascends at the hour of the Sun's entrance into the aforesaid point of the vernal equinox, at the beginning, that is, of that year in which the aforesaid conjunction is to occur. Concerning the investigation of the annimodar, that is, the degree of the ascendant of nativities. From this annimodar, which is the investigation of the degree of the ascendant of a nativity, many astrologers think that the same degree of the ascendant of someone's nativity is found by it, but this is false, and I have already revealed this in my book which I made on the annimodar. But it finds by it the most worthy of all degrees of the circle after the degree of the ascendant at the same hour according to the natural course, and it often agrees, that is, it sometimes happens that the degree of the ascendant is found by it. The knowledge of this is to consider the degree of the conjunction or the degree of the prevention that occurred before the nativity itself. And if the conjunction was prior to that nativity, the nativity itself is called conjunctional; if the prevention was prior to it, it is called preventional. That is, in whichever of them the nativity occurred, in conjunction, that is, or prevention, in the same way and name the aforesaid nativity is called. And because the degree of the conjunction is the same degree in which the luminaries conjoin, there is no inquiry, nor does it need exposition. But in prevention, because each of the luminaries is in its own degree, that is, in different degrees, it is necessary for us to know which of these degrees is to be understood as the degree of prevention. And Ptolemy has already said that the degree of that luminary which is above the earth is the degree of prevention. And some wise men have said that if it happens in prevention that one luminary is in the degree of the orient and the other in the degree of the occident, then the degree of the orient will be the degree of prevention. And Vettius said that the degree of prevention is the degree in which the fulfillment occurs, wishing to understand the degree of the Moon. But because this is the work of Ptolemy, we must return to his opinion in this. Therefore, when the degree of the conjunction or the degree of the prevention is most certainly known, you will establish the degree of the ascendant by an estimation of the hour of the nativity and the four angles and the remaining houses. Then you will look at the degree of the conjunction or the degree of prevention that occurred before the nativity, and which of the planets was more dignified or stronger in it at the same hour of the conjunction or prevention by the multitude of dignities or powers, that is, you will consider which of the planets has greater dominion in the same place. Then you will equate that planet to the estimated hour of the nativity. Then you will see whether the degree of that planet in the sign in which it is is closer to the tenth house or to the ascendant, and to whichever of these it is closer, you will make this angle according to the degree of the planet itself, and you will divide the twelve houses by it. Ptolemy said that if several planets agree in the dominion of the same place and are equal in strength, you will establish as lord of the place that one who is the lord of the hayz. If they also agree in this, you will establish the one who is more likely to change from his state to what is better, that is, the one who wishes to leave a sign in which he is and enter another in which he has more dignities; or if they are oriental from the Sun, you will choose the one who is closest to the Sun and is not under the rays. But if it is in an angle, the one who is closest to the degree of that angle is to be chosen, and understand this. And from this, the hyleg, that is, the place of life in nativities, the knowledge of which is: first, you look at the hour of the nativity. If it is by day, you take it from the Sun. If it is before the degree of the ascendant by 5 degrees or less, or if it is in the tenth or eleventh house, whether the sign itself is masculine or feminine, it will be apt to be the hyleg. But if it is in these three places, but in the seventh or eighth or ninth house in a masculine sign, it will not be apt to be the hyleg. But if it is in these three places in a feminine sign, it will not be apt to be the hyleg. Then looking at the Moon, if it is in the ascendant or in the second or third house, or in the seventh or eighth, it will be apt to be the hyleg, whether the sign is masculine or feminine. And if it is before the degree of the ascendant by 5 degrees or less, or if it is in the tenth or eleventh, or in the fourth or fifth, or in the seventh in a feminine sign, it is apt to be the hyleg. But if it is in any of these in a masculine sign, it will not be apt to be the hyleg if it is in the day of the nativity. But if the nativity is nocturnal, we begin with the Moon, which, if it is in any of the aforesaid places, according to what we have said, will be apt to be the hyleg. But if the Moon is not in them, after this, look at the Sun. If it is before the 7th degree by 5 degrees or less, or if it is in the 4th or 5th house, it will be apt to be the hyleg, whether the sign is masculine or feminine. If it is before the ascendant by 5 degrees or less, or

[Determining the Hyleg]
in the ascendant, or in the second sign, it will also be apt for the hyleg. But if it is in any of these places in a feminine sign, it will not be apt for the hyleg. If none of the luminaries are apt for the hyleg, then look at the nativity: whether it is conjunct or preventional, that is, whether it is after the conjunction or prevention. If the nativity is conjunct and the degree of conjunction is in any of the angles, or in a succedent house, it will be in a place apt for the hyleg. But if the aforesaid degree is cadent from these eight places, that is, from the angles and from the succedent houses, it will not be the hyleg. Then you will look at the degree of the Part of Fortune: if it is in any of the angles or in the succedent houses, it will be in a place apt for the hyleg. But if it is cadent from these eight places, you will then look at the degree of the ascendant and constitute it as the hyleg. If the nativity is preventional, you will begin from the degree of prevention. You will look at it as you did before with the degree of conjunction, and after that, the degree of the Part of Fortune, and after that, the degree of the ascendant, in the order we mentioned for the degree of conjunction. You will not care about the sex of the signs, that is, you will not look at whether those signs are masculine or feminine, except only in the luminaries. That is, in the degree of conjunction or prevention, and the ascendant, and the Part of Fortune, you do not consider whether they are in masculine or feminine signs, both in the angles and in the succedent houses. But these four will only be apt for the hyleg when they are in these eight places, that is, in the angles or their succedent houses. If they are in receding places, that is, cadent from the angles, they will not be apt for the hyleg. It appears that the Sun is apt for the hyleg by day and night, above the earth and below the earth, in 11 places: above the earth in 6 places, and below the earth in 5. The Moon will also be apt for the hyleg by day and night, above the earth and below the earth, similarly in 11 places: above the earth in 5, and below the earth in 6. And if the Moon is in these places under the Sun's rays, it will not be apt for the hyleg. You will look for the hyleg in the angles and their succedent houses according to how the 12 houses of the circle are equalized by the degrees of the ascendant's hours, according to how its work is explained in the canon of planets, that is, in the book of the courses of the planets. And when you have equalized the houses in this way, every planet that is before the degree of the ascendant sign or of any house by 5 degrees or less, its strength will be valid in the house that succeeds it. And every place among the places we mentioned is apt for the hyleg if any of its lords looks at it, who is the lord of the house, or the lord of exaltation, or the lord of the term, or of the triplicity, or the lord of the face. If not, it will not be apt for the hyleg. Concerning the Alcochoden. The text of the Alcochoden, who is the significator of life, that is, the lord of years or the giver of years, whom you wish to know, and you already know the hyleg in the order I predicted: you will look at the lord of the hyleg's house, or the lord of its exaltation, or the lord of its term, or the lord of its triplicity, or its face, whichever of these is stronger and more authoritative in the hyleg's place. And if it aspects the hyleg, it will be more worthy of being the Alcochoden. If it does not aspect the hyleg, and it has more authority, you will look at the one with less authority until you find one of them that aspects. If it does not aspect the hyleg, that place cannot be the hyleg. And then you will seek from another hyleg, and again you will seek from the same second hyleg the Alcochoden in the order we predicted. If two or three planets are equal in authority in the degree of the hyleg, and each aspects, the one who is stronger in place will be more worthy of being the Alcochoden. But if they are equal in strength of place, that is, where the planets themselves are, that one will be the Alcochoden who is closer to the degree of the hyleg. Some, however, thought it better to look at the lord of the house, whom if they saw aspecting the hyleg, they would make him the Alcochoden and not consider another. And if they did not find the lord of the house aspecting the hyleg, they would take the lord of exaltation, whom if they saw aspecting the hyleg, they would make him the Alcochoden and not consider another. They did similarly with the lord of the triplicity, term, and face in order. And Dorotheus preferred the lord of the term in this lord of the house. And some said that if two or three or more planets are equal in dignity and in proximity of aspect to the degree of the hyleg, that one will be the Alcochoden who is in a laudable place from the Sun, that is, who is with the Sun in one degree by 16 minutes or less, or closer to the degree of the angle, or at the beginning of its rising, that is, when it appears in the morning, or is in its second station, or is in some laudable place from the Sun as we said, he will be the Alcochoden. But if the degree of the Sun is the hyleg, and it is in Aries or Leo, the Sun will be the hyleg and Alcochoden simultaneously, and no other Alcochoden will be considered besides it. Similarly, if the degree of the Moon is the hyleg, and it is in Taurus or Cancer, you will take it as the hyleg and Alcochoden simultaneously, and you will not consider another Alcochoden besides it. The Almuten is the one who presides over the nativity; from him is signified the being of the native after the hyleg and Alcochoden. And this planet has more authority than the others: in the ascendant, and in the places of the luminaries, and in the place of the Part of Fortune, and also in the place of the conjunction or prevention that is before the nativity. If any planet presides over two, three, four, or more places due to the multitude of its power, it will be the Almuten, that is, the author and significator of life after the hyleg and Alcochoden, and through him is signified the being of the native. And some consider him the Alcochoden for giving life. Concerning the Profection of Signs. From this, the sign of profection in the years of nativities and of the world. For in the years of nativities, the knowledge is this: that you look at how many years have passed for the native from the perfect solar years. And you will look at one sign each year, and you will begin from the native's ascendant through the succession of signs until the number is finished. The sign that succeeds is the sign of profection from the ascendant, namely the sign of the entering year, which you have not included in this number. This will be in such a degree as it was in the ascendant of the nativity. And its lord is called the Alcochoden, whose interpretation is the lord of the year. Similarly, you will count from the sign of the Sun one sign for each year, and from this will come the sign of profection from the Sun. Similarly from the sign of the Moon and from the Midheaven, and from the Part of Fortune, in the likeness of the degree of the radix, that is, the point of nativity. An example of this is someone born with Capricorn rising, in its 3rd degree. The Sun was in Pisces, in its 15th degree. And the Midheaven was Scorpio, 8 degrees. And the Moon in Libra, 15 degrees. And the Part of Fortune in Leo, 17 degrees. Now three perfect years have passed for the native, and the fourth year arrives from the ascendant in Aries, which is the fourth from Capricorn, up to the 17th degree of the same Aries. And Mars will be the Alcochoden. And the place of the Sun arrives at Gemini up to the 15th degree of the same sign. And the Moon arrives at Capricorn, at 15 degrees. And the profection from the Midheaven arrives at the 8th degree of Aquarius. And the profection from the Part of Fortune arrives up to the 17th degree of Scorpio. And when the year arrives at the degree of profection, as to the 17th degree of Aries in this example, and between it and a similar degree of the succeeding sign to which the next year should arrive in the same house, there is a planet or its rays, and you want to know when the profection will arrive at that planet or its rays, you will look at the distance between the degree to which the year will arrive and the planets or rays in degrees and minutes. You will multiply that by 12, and a sixth of that number which you multiply, or in 12 degrees and 6 minutes of one degree. And whatever results will be the days from that year in which...

[Profection of the World's Years]
in which the profection will come from the degree in which the force begins to the degree to which you have numbered, then the profection of that planet will occur. The profection, however, from the years of the world, Alchindus said, is what was between the year of the conjunction that signified the sect of the Saracens and the year of Al-Biruni in which Muhammad first began to preach, which was the first year of the Arabs, 52 solar years and 57 days. And the ascendant of that year of the aforementioned conjunction of the sect was the sign of Gemini, and the profection of the same year came to Virgo. And between the first year of the Arabs and the first year of Yazdegerd, the king of the Persians, there were 3624 days, that is, complete. Therefore, when you wish to have knowledge of this matter, take the years of Yazdegerd and convert them into days, as has already been explained in the Azig, that is, in the book of planetary courses. And add to them the days that are between the first year of the Arabs and Yazdegerd, and divide this by 365 days and a quarter of a day. And as many divisions as come out, so many will be the solar years, and what remains of months and days will be from the imperfect year. When this has been collected from the years, these are the solar years from the beginning of the years of the Arabs. Therefore, project all years, one sign at a time, and begin from Virgo, and to whatever sign the number leads you, that will be the sign to which the year of the world comes from the ascendant of the conjunction of the aforementioned sect. Others, however, besides Alchindus, thought that they should add to the complete years of Yazdegerd 61 years, 2 months, 12 days, and 16 hours, from the years of the infidels, which are without fraction, that is, without a quarter of a day, and extend these years into days and convert the days into solar years as we have said, and begin to project from the beginning of Libra. If you want the profection from the sign of the conjunction of the sect, let the profection be from Scorpio. But if you want the profection from the ascendant of the kingdom, subtract from the years of Yazdegerd those 217 complete years and convert them into solar years as we have said, and begin to project from Virgo. Again, if you want the profection from the ascendant of the profection of the change of conjunction from the watery triplicity to the fiery triplicity, subtract from the complete years of Yazdegerd 176 years and convert those that remain into solar years, and begin to project from Leo, and wherever the number arrives in that sign, there will be the profection of each beginning of those things we have said. Concerning the direction of the significator. From this follows atazir, that is, direction: this is that you direct some significator to some unknown place and know what is between them from the degrees of direction, taking for each degree one year. Therefore, when you wish to know this, and that significator is in the ascendant, which you wish to direct to some part of the circle, subtract the ascensions of the degree in which the significator you wish to direct was, by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it. And what remains will be the degree of direction. If the significator is in the seventh degree, you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir, that is, the opposite of the degree in which the significator is, from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it in that region. But if the significator is in the midheaven or in the angle of the earth, you will subtract the ascensions of the degree of the significator from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it by the circle of direction, and what remains will be the degree of direction. But if that significator which you wish to direct is in some place outside the four angles, you will look at its longitude from one of these angles, which are the angle of the midheaven and the angle of the earth. This is that you look at the significator, which if it is between the ascendant and the midheaven, you subtract the ascensions of the degree of the midheaven by the direct circle from the ascensions of the degree of the significator. And if it is between the seventh and the midheaven, you subtract the ascensions of the degree of the significator from the ascensions of the degree of the midheaven by the direct circle. And what remains, from whichever of these places it is, you will divide by the parts of the hours of that day of the degree in which the significator is, and what comes out will be the hours of longitude from the angle. And if it is between the ascendant and the angle of the earth, you will subtract the ascensions of the degree of the significator by the direct circle from the ascensions of the degree of the angle of the earth. Again, if the significator is between the angle of the earth and the seventh, you will subtract the ascensions of the degree of the angle of the earth by the direct circle from the ascensions of the degree of the significator. And what remains from whichever of these places, you will divide by the times of the hours of the day of the nadir, that is, the opposite of the degree of the significator. And what comes out will be the hours of longitude from the angle. When you know the hours of longitude from the angle and you wish to direct the significator to some place of the circle of signs, and the significator is in the middle of the eastern circle, which is from the midheaven to the angle of the earth of those that succeed the ascendant, subtract the ascensions of that degree in which the significator was from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it by the direct circle, and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle; keep it. After this, you will subtract the ascensions of that degree in which the significator was by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it, and what remains will be the significator of the region. After this, look at the remainder that is between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region; take its sixth part and multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle; what results will be the equation. And if the significator of the direct circle is less than the significator of the region, you will add the equation to the significator of the direct circle. And if the significator of the direct circle is more, you will subtract the equation from it, and what remains will be the degree of direction. Likewise, if the significator which you wish to direct is in the middle of the western circle, which is from the angle of the earth to the midheaven of what succeeds the seventh, you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir of the degree of the significator which you wish to direct from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it by the direct circle, and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle. After this, you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir of the degree of the significator by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it, and what remains will be the significator of the region. Then you will take the remainder that is between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region; take its sixth part and multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle, and what results will be the equation. After this, you will look at the significator of the direct circle; if it is less than the significator of the region, you will add the equation to the significator of the direct circle. If the significator of the direct circle is more than the significator of the region, you will subtract the equation from the significator of the direct circle, and what comes out of it will be the degree of direction. If the significator is in another quadrant, and the place to which you direct it is in another quadrant, you will direct the significator to the angle that succeeds it, then you will direct from the angle to the place to which you wish to direct it.

[Decan and Novenary Lords]
which succeeds until you come to some novenary from which the degree is: and the planet will be the lord of that novenary: for example: if the sign from which that degree was, was from the triplicity of Aries: then the first novenary of that sign will be Mars, lord of Aries: the second novenary of the genus will be Venus, lady of Taurus: and the third novenary will be Mercury, lord of Gemini. Similarly up to the ninth novenary. If the sign was from the triplicity of Cancer, the first novenary will be the Moon: the second novenary will be the Sun, lord of Leo: and the third will be Mercury, lord of Virgo. And if the sign was from the triplicity of Libra, the first novenary will be Venus, lady of Libra: the second will be Mars, lord of Scorpio: and the third will be Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius. Similarly in the triplicity of Capricorn, its first novenary is Saturn, lord of Capricorn: and the second similarly Saturn, lord of Aquarius: and the third Jupiter, lord of Pisces. Then what follows according to the order of succession of the signs: for example: if a planet or some house from the houses, that is, was in the 19th degree of Aquarius, if the sign is divided into nine divisions, the 19th degree will be in the sixth division, and since the sign of Aquarius is in the triplicity of Libra, its first novenary is Venus, lady of Libra: the second Mars, lord of Scorpio: and the third Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius: the fourth Saturn, lord of Capricorn: and the fifth also Saturn, lord of Aquarius: and the sixth Jupiter, lord of Pisces: and thus the novenary of the 19th degree of Aquarius will be Jupiter. The method of finding the lord of the decan. From this, you will divide the ascendant into three parts, and each division will be 10 degrees: and you will give the first division to the lord of the ascendant, and the second to the lord of the fifth sign from it, and the third to the lord of the ninth: for the ascendant, the fifth, and the ninth are always one triplicity: for example: from the beginning of Aries up to its tenth degree, the decan is Mars. And if it is from the 10th degree up to the 20th degree, its decan will be the Sun, lord of Leo. And if it is from the 20th up to its end, its decan will be Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius. From this, the lord of the orb in nativities, that is, you will look at the lord of the hour in which the native is born, and you will give the ascendant and the lord of the hour in the first year of his nativity, and by him, that is, the lord of the hour, will be signified the health or illness of the native's body, just as it is signified by the lord of the radical ascendant, that is, of the nativity: and you will give the lord of the second hour from it to the second house from the ascendant in the second year, and by him will be signified his being in that year, the being of substance, etc., just as it is signified by the being of the lord of the house of substance: and you will give the lord of the third hour from it to the third house from the ascendant in the third year, and by the being of that one in that year will be signified the being of brothers and sisters and others, just as it will be signified by the being of the lord of the third house. And you will give the lord of the fourth hour to the fourth house from the ascendant in the fourth year: and by his being in that year will be signified the being of fathers and those who are signified by the fourth house. Similarly, you will do with the lords of the hours by succession, that is, you will give the lord of each hour to the radical house, and the lord of the 12th hour from the hour of nativity will be the 12th house from the radical ascendant and the 12th year. And the lord of the 13th hour from the nativity of the radical ascendant and the 13th year. And the lord of the 14th hour from it will be the house of substance and the 14th year. And the lord of the first hour is named the lord of the ascendant of the hour. The lord of the second hour is the lord of the hour of the house of substance, and the lord of the third hour is the lord of the hour of the house of brothers: and so on for the others. Similarly, the lord of each of these hours is named by the name of the house: and he is also named the lord of the orb, and by him is signified every year, just as it is signified by the Alcochoden: that is, by the lord of the year: and some astrologers place the lord of the orb, that is, of the radical ascendant, in the first year, and in the second year the planet that succeeds him, and in the third year the planet that succeeds him, as has been said in the lord of the hour. From this, the Alfridaria disposition: that is, when the nativity is diurnal, the Alfridaria Sun will preside over the disposition of his life in the beginning, according to the quantity of his Alfridaria years, which are ten: after this, the planet that succeeds the Sun, which is Venus, whose Alfridaria years are eight. And after Venus, the planet that succeeds her, which is Mercury, and his years are thirteen: then the Moon: and her Alfridaria years are nine: then Saturn, and his Alfridaria years are eleven. Then Jupiter, and his Alfridaria years are twelve: then Mars, and his Alfridaria years are seven: then the Head of the Dragon, and his Alfridaria years are three: after this, the Tail: and her Alfridaria years are two. The collected years together are 75 years. After this, the disposition returns to the Sun, and similarly up to the last of the planets. But if the nativity is nocturnal, the disposition begins with the Moon, and she will dispose of her Alfridaria years, which are nine. Similarly, planet after planet, as we have said for the Sun. When a planet has disposed of its Alfridaria years, it will dispose of its own first seventh part of its Alfridaria only. Then in the second seventh, the planet that succeeds it will participate: after this, in the third seventh, the third planet that succeeds will participate, and so on until the planet that is before it participates in the last seventh of its Alfridaria years: and each has a judgment when it participates with another over the nativity. From this, the Almanar, that is, the preeminence by which it is said that a planet goes over a planet: that is, you will look at the mean course of the planet and its equated place: and if its equated place is less than its mean course, it will be ascending from the middle of its circle up to the summit of the circle: and if its equated place is more than its mean course, it will be descending from the middle of its circle down to its lowest point: and if its equated place is equal to its mean course, it will be in the middle of its circle. Then you will subtract the planet's place from its mean course after you have most certainly known this, that is, the equated place: or conversely, subtracting the smaller from the larger of them, and you will multiply what remains by seven and divide by 22: and what comes out of the division will be this for every planet according to the quantity of its ascension or descension. For Venus and Mercury, we take what is between both places, that is, what is between the places.

[Planetary Strength and Aspects]
We do as above with the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, because by this we know which of them is stronger in the circle of the apogee. But when Venus and Mercury, if either of them is oriental and its place is equal to less than the Sun's place, you will take the remainder, which is between the Sun's place and its place, and you will do with it as you have done, as was said, in the higher planets, by multiplication and division. And the signification of the planets is more proper and stronger when they have gone over each other, that is, when one has gone over the other in conjunction. In opposition, however, and in the quartile aspect, their signification will be less apparent and weaker. And yet, when one of them is ascending and the other descending, then the ascending one goes above the descending one. But when both are descending, the one with the lesser declination goes above the one with the greater or more declination. If, however, both are ascending, the one with the greater ascension goes above the one with the lesser ascension. It also says in another way, that is, so that you know the latitude of both planets, because their northern one goes over the meridian. And if both are northern, the one with the greater latitude goes over the one with the lesser latitude. If, however, both are southern, the one with the lesser latitude goes over the one with the greater latitude. Therefore, it is said that the Moon goes over Jupiter in these two operations. Similarly, if either of the two planets is in the middle of the circle, having no latitude, then the ascending northern one goes over the one that lacks latitude, and the one without latitude goes over the descending southern one. And from this, the opening of the gates is said to occur when an inferior planet joins a superior planet, and their houses are opposite. And from this, Albuzic, which is a thing that the Indians greatly observed. For they numbered 12 hours after the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, and applied them to the Sun, dividing the 12 hours into three parts, that is, into the hours of the Sun. And they judge over all four hours according to the judgment of the lords of the triplicity of the Sun at the hour of conjunction. Then they give to Venus after 12 hours and divide them again into three parts, and judge over every third division according to the lords of the triplicity of Venus at the hour of conjunction. After this, they do similarly with Mercury and the other planets in their succession until the orb returns to the Sun after 84 hours, and they do not cease to do so frequently until the second conjunction comes. And some say that Albuzic is this: that after the conjunction there are 12 unequal hours, which are called combust, and no one should begin any work in these. And after these hours, there are 72 uncombust hours in which the beginning of works is useful. And after these 72 uncombust hours, there are 12 combust hours similarly until the conjunction that follows. After this, they divide these 12 hours into three divisions, that is, into parts. They said that when someone begins to walk or wage war in the first four hours, the loss of life will be feared. In the second four hours, the detriment of one's body will be feared without the loss of life. And in the last four hours, the detriment of one's substance and one's own and all that they possess is to be feared.

[The Fifth Difference: Parts]
The fifth difference in the commemoration of all parts. And because we have completed the expositions of those things that follow from the names of the astrologers, let us now pursue the commemoration of all parts. And when we have noted the place of the parts, take from that place to that place and project this from the ascendant or from another place. We say that you add to that whatever is between the two places of the degrees of the ascendant, and project from the ascendant or from the beginning of the sign from which you project. An example of this is the operation of the Part of Fortune, because you take whatever is between the Sun and the Moon in degrees, and you add to those degrees of the ascendant sign. Whatever is collected, you project it from 30 to 30 degrees, and you begin to project from the beginning of the ascendant sign, and where the number ends, there is the Part of Fortune. And at night, conversely, from the Moon to the Sun, and you add the degrees of the ascendant sign above, and project this from 30 to 30, and begin to project from the beginning of the ascendant sign. Let us begin here, therefore, after the Part of Fortune, the 12 parts of the houses, and let us begin from the ascendant. The first house is the Part of Life, and it is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Bile is taken from the degree of conjunction or prevention that was before the nativity up to the degree of the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Future Things, that is, the Part of the Sun, is taken by day from the Moon to the Sun, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Love and Concord, that is, the Part of Venus, is taken by day from the Part of Fortune to the Part of Future Things, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Stability and Trust of the Ascendant of the Duration of the Native is like the Part of Concord and Love. The Part of Animosity and Audacity, that is, the Part of Mars, is taken by day from Mars to the degree of the Part of Fortune, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The second house is the Part of Substance, and it is taken by day and night from the lord of the house of substance to the degree and minute of the house of substance, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Poverty and Smallness of Ingenuity, that is, the Part of Mercury, is taken by day from the Part of Future Things to the Part of Fortune, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Beatitude and Triumph and Victory, that is, the Part of Jupiter, is taken by day from the Part of Future Things to Jupiter, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The third house is the Part of Brothers, and it is taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Benevolence of Brothers is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. If Saturn is under the rays, it is taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant.

[Fourth House Parts]
The fourth house is the part of the fathers. It is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the father's death is taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the years is taken by day from the lord of the Sun's house to Saturn, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. And if the Sun or any of Saturn's houses is in its own house, take it by day from the Sun to Saturn, and by night the reverse, and project it from the ascendant, and do not consider whether Saturn is apparent or under the rays. The part of inheritances and possessions is taken by day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the native's nobility, and of him about whom there is doubt whether he is the son of that father to whom he is attributed, or of another, is taken by day from the degree of the Sun to the degree of its exaltation, and it is projected from the ascendant. But if the Sun is in the degree of its exaltation by day, and the Moon by night in the degree of its exaltation, the part will be in the degrees of the ascendant, and it will be the signification of the degree of the ascendant. The part of the end of things is taken by day and night from Saturn to the lord of the house of conjunction or arrival, and it is added above the degrees of the ascendant, and it is projected from the ascendant. The fifth house is the part of children, and it is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part that signifies the time when a son should be born, and the number of males or females, and what the woman will bear, is taken by day and night from Mars to Jupiter, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the knowledge of a male and female child is taken by day and night from the Moon to Jupiter, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part by which it is known whether the native about whom the question is asked is male or female is taken by day from the lord of the Moon's house to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part signifying the son when Jupiter reaches him, that is, to the degree of the part signifying the son, is taken by day and night from Mars to Jupiter, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of affection and joy is taken by day and night from Venus to Saturn, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the knowledge of the existence of children is taken by day and night from the Moon to Venus, and it is projected from the ascendant. The sixth house is the part of infirmity and azemena, that is, inseparable weakness of some member, and it is taken by day from Saturn to Mars, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of servants is taken by day from Mercury to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. And Alendezgod said that it is taken by day from Mercury to the Part of Fortune, and by night the reverse. And he said: it is necessary to use both parts together. The seventh house is the part of the betrothal of men or marriage, and it is taken by day and night from the Sun to Venus, and it is projected from the ascendant. And this part is similar to the part of the mandates of rumors. And the part of the betrothal of women or marriage, according to Hermes, is taken by day and night from Venus to Saturn, and it is projected from the ascendant. And this part is congruent with the part of the cultivation of the earth. Also, the part of the betrothal of women according to Velius is taken by day and night from the Sun to Mars, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of affection and pleasure is taken by day and night from Venus to the degree of the seventh, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of marriages is taken by day and night from Saturn to Venus, and it is projected from the ascendant. The eighth house is the part of death, and it is taken by day and night from the Moon to the degree and minute of the eighth house, and it is added above what Saturn has washed in its sign, and it is projected from the beginning of Saturn's sign. The part of the planet that kills is taken by day from the lord of the ascendant's degree to the Moon's degree, and by night the reverse. The part of the year in which the native fears death, and poverty, impediment, and destruction, is taken by day and night from Saturn to the degree of the lord of the house of conjunction or prevention that occurred before the native's birth. The part of bondage and imprisonment, whether one is freed from it or not, is taken by day from Saturn to the Part of Fortune, and by night the reverse. The ninth house is the part of peregrination, and it is taken by day and night from the lord of the ninth house to the degree and minute of the ninth house, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of travel by water is taken by day from Saturn to the 15th degree of the sign of Cancer, and by night the reverse. And if Saturn is in the 15th degree of Cancer, the degree of the part will be the degree of the ascendant. The part of religion is taken by day from the Moon to Mercury, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The tenth house is the part of region and kingdom, and what work the native does, and it is taken by day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the king and kingdom is taken by day from Mars to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. And there is another part similar to the part of the fathers. The part of work and kingdom according to Velius is taken by day and night from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part signifying whether there is a cause for the kingdom or not is taken by day and night from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven, and it is projected from Jupiter. The part of Mars is taken by day from Venus to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and it is projected from the ascendant. The eleventh house is the part of friends, and it is taken by day and night from the Moon to Mercury, and it is projected from the ascendant. And Alendezgod said that it is taken by night the reverse. The part signifying the effect of friends and friendship is taken by day from the Part of Fortune to the part of future things, and by night the reverse, and so on. The twelfth house is the part of enemies according to Hermes, and it is taken by day and night from the lord of the house of enemies to the degree and minute of the house of enemies, and it is projected from the ascendant. And according to some ancients, it is taken by day and night from Saturn to Mars, etc. And these are the parts of the 12 houses. And these are other parts that the masters of astrological judgments use much. Among these is the part that signifies false rumors when it falls in a tortuous or mutable sign, or the lord of the house is retrograde or impeded, or malefics aspect it or are conjoined with it. And it signifies the truth of rumors if it falls with benefics or in their houses or terms, or if they aspect it, or if it is in a direct sign, and it is taken by day from Mercury.

[Parts of Kingdoms and Revolutions]
in Venus at night, and conversely, and it is projected. And according to Albumasar, in the day from Mercury to the Moon, and at night conversely, etc. The part of reason and profundity of sense is taken in the day from Saturn to the Moon, and at night conversely, etc. The part of wisdom and discipline is taken in the day and night from Saturn to Jupiter, and it is projected, etc. The part of war and battles is taken in the day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is projected from the Ascendant. The part of peace and concord of armies is taken in the day and night from the Moon to Mercury, and it is projected from the Ascendant. The part of looking in the revolution of the year is taken in the day from the Moon to Venus, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the Sun. Concerning the parts of revolutions in the causes of kingdoms. Because, with God's help, we have introduced these parts which are suitable for particular matters, we will pursue the parts which are suitable for the revolutions of the years of the world and the conjunctions signifying the causes of the kingdom's stability or its duration. Among these is the part which is called the part of the kingdom or empire, which is exercised in the revolution of the world: it is taken from Mars to the Moon, and it is projected from the Ascendant of the conjunction which signifies the change of the kingdom. Likewise, it is taken in another way, namely, from the degree of the Ascendant of the conjunction to the degree of the conjunction, and it is projected from the degree of the Ascendant of the revolution. Also, it is taken in another way from the degree of the Midheaven of the revolution to the Sun, and it is projected from Jupiter, i.e., from the degree of Jupiter. The part of the king's time, that is, how long he should endure, is taken at the hour of the king's election from the Sun to the 15th degree of the sign of Leo, and it is projected from the Moon; then it is taken from the Moon to the 15th degree of the sign of Cancer, and it is projected from the Sun. Another part concerning the time of the king's election is taken at the hour of the king's election in the day from Jupiter to Saturn, and at night conversely, and it is projected from the Ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the king arose. If Jupiter was in a common sign and the revolution was diurnal, and Jupiter was cadent from the angles, then it is taken from Saturn to Jupiter, and 30 degrees are added above, and it is projected from the Ascendant. But if Saturn and Jupiter were opposite to each other and both were cadent from the Ascendant, the midpoint between them is taken, i.e., half the degrees between them are taken, and it is projected from the Ascendant. And if Jupiter was in his exaltation, and the revolution was at night, it is counted from him to Saturn, and it is projected from the Ascendant. These are the parts from which the time of the king's election and its duration are primarily extracted. The first of these is to look at the hour of the king's election, which comes from the annual profection from the conjunction of the triplicity which signified the sect, from a certain number, for every 30 degrees a year, and for every two and a half degrees a month. When you know in what degree or sign this is, keep it, because this is the place from which you will equate the first part. And when you want to apply it, you will apply the Ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the elected one arose. After this, look from the oriental planet, from the Sun, and Saturn, and Jupiter in that year, to the degree of the equation of the first part, which is kept. Project it from the Ascendant of the revolution of the year, and where the number arrives, that is the place of the first part. The second part is found thus: take at the conjunction in which the king arose or began to reign, to what sign or degree the profection of the year arrived, from the number given for every 30 degrees a year, and 2 and a half degrees a month, up to the day the king arose, and that will be the place of the equation of the second part. Keep it. After this, look from the occidental planet, from the Sun, and Saturn, and Jupiter, to the place of the equation of the second part which you kept, and project it from the Ascendant of the revolution, and where it arrives will be the place of the second part. These are the parts which signify the strength of the king and his duration. There are other parts which are used in the revolutions of the years of the world, and by them it is known what is heavy in the market, and what will be light in price, or what is precious or vile, much or little. This is to look at where the part fell, that is, in whose planet's house, exaltation, term, or triplicity. If that planet is retrograde or combust or in a bad place, that thing will be vile and of little value. But if it is in a place of strength or in the angles, especially in the Midheaven, that thing will be heavy and of great price. And if the lord of the house comes to the place of its fall, that thing will be vile. And look at the aspects of the benefics and malefics to them, and also to the Moon and its ruler. And see how and by whom that part is aspected. If a benefic and the Moon aspect that part, that thing will be multiplied. If malefics aspect it, it will suffer detriment. The part of the disposition of the year from the Moon to Mercury. The part of water from the Moon to Venus. The part of barley from the Moon to Jupiter. The part of chickpeas (which is a kind of legume) from Venus to the Sun. The part of lentils from Mars to Saturn. The part of beans from Saturn to Mars. The part of millet from Saturn to Mars. The part of onions from Saturn to Mars. The part of wheat from the Sun to Mars. The part of nuts from Mercury to Mars. The part of sugar from Mercury to Venus. The part of dates from the Sun to Venus. The part of honey from the Moon to the Sun. The part of rice (which is a kind of grain) from Jupiter to Saturn. The part of olives from Mercury to the Moon. The part of grapes from Saturn to Venus. The part of cotton from Mercury to Venus. The part of sesame (which is a kind of white seed similar to flax seed, and doctors use it, and a useful ointment is made from it) from Mercury to Jupiter or from Saturn to Venus. The part of melons (which are large and yellow) from Mercury to Saturn. The part of sour foods from Saturn to Mars. The part of sweet foods from the Sun to Venus. The part of foods with the taste of celery or similar herbs from Mars to Saturn. The part of bitter foods from Mercury to Saturn. The part of sour medicines from Saturn to Jupiter. The part of salty medicines from Mars to the Moon. The part of poisonous medicines from the Dragon's Head to Saturn. And all these are projected from the Ascendant of the revolution of the year. These are all the parts that have come down to us. We have also introduced these last parts, and if there is a weak narration in them, it is so that I would not omit anything that could be introduced to the mastery of astrological judgments, but rather prefer it. The table of friendship and enmity of the signs. Friends: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. Enemies: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.

[The Wise Man Rules the Stars]
The commentary of John of Saxony on the text of Alchabitius. The wise man will rule the stars. My Ptolemy says in the wisdom of the Almagest: And it can be declared thus: He will rule the stars who can impede or prohibit the effects coming from them. But a wise man can do this, therefore, etc. The major premise is manifest: that he rules another who can tell him to do this and he does it, and to leave this and he leaves it. The minor premise is proven by the authority of Ptolemy in the first proposition of the Centiloquium, where it is said: The best astrologer can prohibit much evil that is to come according to the stars, when he has foreknown its nature. For thus he will forewarn him to whom evil is to come, so that when it comes, he may be able to endure it. And it is confirmed by the authority of the same in the eighth proposition of the same, where he says: A wise soul will assist the work of the stars just as a sower assists natural strengths. But it must be noted concerning the way in which a wise man can impede or assist the work of the stars. It is certain that we cannot simply impede celestial influence, just as we cannot impede the combustion of fire; but we can dispose the patient to receive celestial influence in one way or another. For we see that the same heat of the sun dissolves ice and hardens clay. Haly gives a familiar example of this in his commentary on the aforementioned proposition: The best astrologer, etc., saying: if we know that someone is to suffer a hot and dry illness of the nature of Mars, we can, before the advent of that influence, change him to the opposite, that is, to coldness and humidity; and thus the influence that should have caused him illness will reduce him to a temperate state. It is also clear to everyone that we can impede the action of fire from burning a specific combustible, that is, by removing it from the fire or by pouring water over it. Since therefore knowledge is divided according to the division of the things of which they are, everyone is called wise in his own knowledge, taking wisdom broadly for knowledge, as Albumazar takes it in many places of his Introduction: so that we may see of which wise men the proposed words are spoken: we can distinguish between wise men and wise men in a certain universal way. Therefore, among the number of wise men, some are truly wise, others apparently so. Aristotle touches on this distinction in the first book of the Elenchi, where he says: Some are beautiful because of their beauty; others, however, pretend to be so. And these, that is, apparently wise men, are divided into two parts: for some of them appear wise only according to the estimation of the common people, like the rich of this world. And some among the advanced, like the sophists. The first are those who have the riches of this world, of whom Albumazar speaks in his great Introduction where he discusses the sects contradicting astronomy. And these are of the new sect. Albumazar says there: He is more worthy in the eyes of the generality of the common people who has more substance. Thus it is because the dignity of substance among them is greater than the dignity of knowledge. And they say that when a man has substance, it does not hinder him if he is unskilled in the science of the stars, and medicine, and other sciences, which he proves with a most false proof: for they prove science by substance. And this proof of error is a most false proof: for things are proven by their genus and by what is similar to them, that is, wisdom by wisdom, substance by substance, and not by what is dissimilar to them, therefore it does not prove wisdom by substance. Others appear learned or wise among some advanced people, like the sophists. Of whom Haly says in the first book of the Elenchi: For some it is more worthwhile to seem and not to be than to be and not to seem; and Master Alanus de Insulis, speaking of them, says: Poor jurists avoid his schools: he stirs up real disputes: they become antagonists. Here he proves, here he disapproves: to this he concludes, to that. And the sophist shouts with a hundred mouths. Truly learned men differ according to more and less certainty, as the Commentator says in the second book of Metaphysics. Mathematical sciences are in the highest degree of certainty. Natural sciences follow them. These are less certain, that is, logicians and natural philosophers not transferring themselves to other sciences, they have nothing of philosophy except words: of these also Master Alanus says: He always shouts and argues, while he searches the hidden places of Aristotle. But if you ask what or how much the mind lives on by study, but rather by philosophizing. Mathematicians are more certain. And these are divided into two parts: for some of them study the motions of the times and do not care about judgments, or deny them. And these are of whom Albumazar speaks in the sixth and fifth sect of those who speak of judgments, indeed it will be seen later. The second, however, study motions and judgments: of whom Alanus speaks, referring to Albumazar himself: There Albumazar consults the stars, the poles, the sky, and the seven planets, and brings back their reports to the earth. He arms the lands and the perishable things with counsel. Against celestial wrath and the fury of the gods. Of these Ptolemy says in the proposed words: A wise man will rule the stars. In these words Ptolemy touches on three properties or conditions that a true philosopher must have, especially an astrologer, by which three kinds of men are repelled from astronomy. The first condition is stability of intention. The second is ability of disposition. The third is the renunciation of earthly possessions. He touches on the first when he says: man. The second when he says: wise. The third when he says: he will rule the stars. As for the first condition, Ptolemy says in the first proposition of the Centiloquium: The science of the stars is from you and from them. And Haly in his commentary on the same says: He who desires to know future things must proceed in two ways. One is to accept the motion of the stars and the works that are done in things according to their motion. And to look at the books that the ancients wrote about the signification of their motions, and to add to these what he has proven in his own theory. Therefore, since there is great labor in observing the motions of the stars, an astrologer cannot be effeminate or remiss. And since much time is required to consult the books of the ancients, he cannot be a vagabond. Therefore, it is necessary that an astrologer be firm and stable in meditation. And thus the effeminate and remiss are repelled from astronomy. As for the second condition, Ptolemy says in the seventh proposition of the Centiloquium: No one will be able to give certain judgments according to the complexion of the stars, unless he is a man who has well known the strength of the soul and the natural complexion. Therefore, he wants a man to be naturally disposed to this science so that he may profit in it. This, according to what seems to me, is this science above all sciences. For I have seen good clerics in logic and natural philosophy who could in no way grasp anything of astronomy, not even algorism. Therefore, it is clear that those who are naturally indisposed are repelled from astronomy, of whom Albumazar makes a sect, as will be seen immediately. As for the third condition, Haly says in the commentary on the first proposition of the Centiloquium

[On the Conditions for Astrological Knowledge]
Because it is necessary for us to be solicitous about worldly things, the knowledge of future things is taken away from us. But if we were separated from all worldly things, we could prognosticate future things. For this reason, we see many hermits who predict future things. And some epileptics, while tormented by epilepsy, predict future things, because then they do not use bodily senses but only the power of the soul. Therefore, the philosopher, our father, does not say that a rich man is a philosopher, as the philosopher says in the seventh book of Politics. It is not necessary for a philosopher to be the lord of land and sea, but it is sufficient for him to have a servant who ministers vegetables to him. And thus, those who have the riches of this world are repelled from astronomy. Socrates, realizing this, threw gold into the sea, as Valerius narrates. This condition does not please many, nor even me. As for these conditions, Albumazar consoles us in his Introduction, and especially as to the last one, because he changes it to the opposite. He says thus: "And perhaps some are not sufficient for the wisdom of this mastery, while they look at certain things to arrive from truth and their comprehension, so that they can repel error from themselves due to the brevity of their exercise in the knowledge of all things, the knowledge of which is necessary for them in that same intention, as to the first conditions." And after a few intervening words, he says: "And subtle men and those of profound wisdom, perhaps many of those who use them are not sufficient to comprehend them, since the science of this mastery will be the science of other masteries that are necessary in the presence of things due to the profundity that we have said is far from the senses, as to the second condition." Then he consoles us and says: "That which can be attained from its science should not be annulled because of that which cannot be attained." And after a few intervening words, he says that a little wisdom is of much profit. And in this, he changes the third condition to the opposite. And he proves that there is greater utility in astronomy than in any other science. And if error occurs in it, it is more tolerable and less harmful than in other sciences. And he says thus: "For we see physicians err in the prescience of infirmities and diseases, while they predict what happens to the sick from the gravity of the disease and its lightness, and the swiftness of health and its slowness, and also their health or death. But that little error of physicians does not prevent them from the pursuit of their mastery and from its disposition and exercise, nor does it generate blame or doubt among men towards them, who have sought utility and profit from a little error in their mastery through their cure and acquiesce to their medicines. Similarly, shipmasters do not abandon their mastery, nor do men abandon the course of the sea because of a little error of sailors. Similarly, the authors of other wisdoms and masteries can hardly escape the accidents of error or the advent of some impediment that happens to them; but because of this, their mastery is not annulled. And among all these things that we have said, the error of impediment is greater than the error of astrologers, because when a physician errs in the prescience of infirmities, or cure, or in medicines, perhaps this will be the cause of the perdition of souls. And when sailors err, perhaps this will be the cause of the perdition of ships and their shipwreck and the death of those who are in them. And if shepherds and the authors of animal deception err, perhaps this will be the provocation of the perdition of that same kind of animals. But if astrologers err, this is more attributed to the ignorance of the astrologer in the prescience of things, for the inquirer omits to guard against horrible things before they come and because of

[The Dignity of Astrology]
This perhaps will be a dismissal of caution, a provocation of those good things to come, and perhaps there will be loss in them, and perhaps not. In other arts, however, it is not so, because the greatest error of authors is loss and impediment without doubt. And in this, too, what we have said is the dignity and the dignities of the science of the stars. If, therefore, the art of the stars is more dignified and nobler than other arts, and the path of its art in error at certain times is below the path of other arts, and their error is sounder and less impeded, their truth is of greater profit. Therefore, it is right that all intellectual and wise people should receive astrologers and use them and acquiesce to their truth in what they say. This science, especially that part which is about judgments, has many rivals and adversaries. Ptolemy, noticing this in his Quadripartitum, confirms the judgments of the stars, and Albumasar in his great Introductorium. And both agree in the method of confirmation, except that Albumasar posits more than Ptolemy and uses more reasons. Both, in confirming judgments, begin with the operation of the sun. For Ptolemy says in the thirteenth proposition of the first part: "Because the sun operates with the air in all things existing on earth." And Paley, in his commentary, explaining Ptolemy's words, says: "Ptolemy wants to show us that the sphere of fire and air, which is changed by celestial bodies, changes all things that are on earth." And Paley, in his commentary on the second proposition of the same, says that the roots of this science are so manifest that common people, knowing nothing, know and understand them by observing and experiencing them. And Ptolemy, in the 21st proposition, says that ignorant common people know things before they happen. And what is more, he says that mute animals know things before they happen. Albumasar also confirms the science of judgments by many reasons, which it would be very long to narrate all now. Specifically, however, Albumasar disputes against those who deny the judgments of the stars and divides them into ten sects. And I will briefly touch on two or three words about each sect. The first sect says that the planets have no significance over things that happen in this world, which is below the circle of the moon. To these, Albumasar says that all philosophers agree that every substance that moves by natural motion produces natural changes in the essences of things connected to it by nature. And he declares this in the action of fire. But celestial bodies move by natural motion; therefore, they produce natural changes in the four elements connected to them by nature. Albumasar alludes to this reason in many words. The saying of Aristotle in the first book of Meteorology could also be assumed for that sect: "It is necessary for the inferior world to be contiguous to the superior motions, so that all its power may be governed from there." The second sect is of those who said that the planets have significations only over universal things, such as the four elements, and are genera and species. Against these, Albumasar puts forth, among other things, such a reason: "The whole is not the whole except through its parts; therefore, if they signify over the whole, namely over the species, it is necessary that they signify over the individuals which are parts of the species." The third sect is of certain disputants who said that the planets have no signification over the possible, but only over the necessary and the impossible. And Albumasar says that the philosopher dissolved the reasons of these and affirmed the possible by many reasons. And among others, he posits that which Aristotle posits in the first book of Peri Hermeneias, namely, that one should not deliberate or assist. The fourth sect is of some who looked into the science of the whole, which is the science of circles and their being. These said that the planets have no signification over things that happen and occur in this world from individuals of animals and seeds and metals. And that their signification is only over the corruption or change of times. And Albumasar says that these could not deny this quantity, namely, the change of times, to be from the strength of the work of the planets, because this is found and appears from their work, and its repulsion is a disgrace. And afterwards he argues against them from concessions. The fifth sect is of those who looked into the science of the whole and annulled the science of judgments from the part of experiments. And they said that the judgments of astronomy are not true because things happen by experiments, and the truth of a thing cannot be perceived by experiments unless it is found to be twice in one. And this is impossible in the planets, because when a planet is in some place among the signs, and the other planets are aspecting it or conjoined to it, they do not return to it from the signs except after many thousands of years, and the life of one man does not reach such a quantity of years. How then is it possible for a man to find the planets twice in one place so that he may prove from their return to their places what they signify? To these, Albumasar says that the ancients knew the natures of the planets and their significations from many and diverse things, some of which are particular and apparent, others universal. Particular apparent things are, for example, what is found from the opposition of the sun in heating and the moon in humidity and putrefaction, and from the works of the planets in the corruption and change of the air every day and night. Universal things are, for example, what is found from their signification in the revolutions of the years of the world and nativities. And briefly, the meaning of these words is that man in a short time can experience those things that commonly occur; but as for other things that rarely happen, such as great conjunctions, the sayings of our predecessors should suffice us. The sixth sect is of some arithmeticians who were lazy to look at the number of the stars and their equation from the book in which the science of the whole is most certain, namely, the Almagest, which Ptolemy published. But they sought the places of the planets by diverse tables and found the tables to differ as to the places of the planets. Therefore, they said that the judgments are not true since they do not have the true places of the planets. To these, Albumasar says that when an astrologer is about to make a judgment, he must rely on looking at the natures of the planets and their properties from the degree of each sign and its exaltation and the lords of its triplicity, and its place from the angle and its succedents and its fall from the angle and its presence in the house of substance and the house of brothers and the other houses of the circle, and then he judges. The degrees of the signs, however, have a particular signification which astrologers use in certain specific matters. But if there is an error in the place of a planet by minutes or one degree, this does not impede the art of judgments. And it is necessary for him who practices the art of judgments, when the calculator has given him the places of the planets from the signs at certain times, to judge by those places in which the planets are, whether they signify this or that. The certainty of the degree in which they are, from their signs according to truth, will be upon the calculators and will be demanded from them. And he gives an example of physicians, saying: "The physician must judge the nature of each medicine and for what it is useful and what diseases it benefits. But the inquiry into species in regions and their preparation is not to be demanded from physicians, but from the authors of species." So it is, he says, concerning the judgments of the stars. To him who practices judgments, it pertains only to defend that the planets signify over the things of this world, and what they signify; and it pertains to him to know their properties and natures. To the calculator, however, it pertains to verify their degrees. The seventh sect is of those who rejected this science because they looked into it and it was impossible for them to achieve what they wanted. And these are envious followers of this art over their knowledge in it, and they reject the science of the art of judgments because of envy. These are not to be contradicted, as Albumasar says, since their denial is for this art. For a denier should not be constrained except by that by which he is overcome and compelled to come to manifest truth. The eighth sect is of some who boast of medical science, so that they may acquire through it. Not, however, good and wise physicians in the art of medicine who have already read the books of the ancients in the science of medicine and have known the roots of their art and the diversity of elements or times and natures, and their corruption, and other things that are necessary for them in their art from simple and composite things. These have known the dignities of the science of the judgments of the stars. And they know that the science of the stars is the beginning of the science of medicine. And they use the art of judgments in the art of medicine almost frequently in the knowledge of diseases and their augmentation and diminution and in the times of healing. And their right intention in their art is multiplied, and the sick are freed by their hands and multiplied.

[The Ten Sects and Astrology's Divisions]
perfected by them. Some physicians, however, whose inexperience abounds, and whose reason is abbreviated in the knowledge of certain things necessary to them for this purpose, contend in their mastery that they should prioritize acquisition and postpone knowledge. Finally, they contradicted the science of judgments and said that there is no strength in the motions of the planets in this world. Against them, Albumasar cites the saying of Hippocrates, saying: "And Hippocrates already said in the book of air, when he made mention of the diversity of air and elements or natures, that the things we have said about the diversity of air are in the science of the stars. And that the science of the stars is no small part of the science of medicine." The ninth sect is that of the common people. And these are divided into two sects: one is of those who do not know the dignity of judgments and other sciences, nor the dignity of foreknowledge of things. The most worthy among them is he who has more substance. Of these, it was said before. Against them, Albumasar says that substance and fortune are adapted to the wise and the foolish, to the strong and the weak. And man is not praiseworthy for what is adapted to him from this, because this is not adapted to him by his knowledge, nor by his foolishness, nor by his strength or weakness, but he is praised for wisdom and knowledge, because the dignity of man above other animals is only through wisdom and knowledge and through the knowledge of things that have been and that are to come. And with some interpolations, he says that the most worthy thing in man is the knowledge of future things. The tenth sect is also of the common people. And these rejected the science of this mastery because they saw the multitude of errors of those who boast about it, because the common people receive things by the knowledge of appearance. And when they saw the multitude of errors of those who boast about this science in those things that are asked from the science of the judgments of the stars, thinking it false, they rejected it. And they refer the masters of this science to foolishness and said that it is a vain science. Albumasar says that these are not to be blamed in contradicting the masteries of this science, because most of those who boast about it are foolish, inexperienced, and fallible men. And with some interpolations, he says that these practice under the name of this mastery various seductions by which they seduce weak men. He means to say that some practice geomancy or sortilege under the name of this science. These seek nothing but profit. And he says that when these are asked about something, they extend in their answer to the thing that the questioner desires, and it suits them, wanting to make him happy for the sake of their greed. Let this suffice concerning the ten sects that Albumasar presents. And an eleventh sect could be added. And these are those who say that this science is against faith. To whom I say that they have not read the books of the ancient wise men, which if they had read, they would know that this science is not against faith, but rather for faith. For the doctors of this science posit a created world, which is the first foundation of faith. For Daly Albéragel says in the first part of his book, in the chapter on the nature of Jupiter, that at the time when God began to create the world, he placed Jupiter in the ascendant. And Albumasar says in his introduction: "And let us say first that the motion of the circle is from the power of the first cause." And with some interpolations, he says: "Behold how we have drawn the creator from apparent and known things that are perceived by the senses, that he is eternal, having power without the essence of an end, immobile and incorruptible. May his name be blessed and exalted with the greatest exaltation." I will briefly explain the division of astronomy and present the division that Albumasar presents in his great introduction. There are two kinds of astronomy: one is the science of the whole, that is, of circles and their motions. The second is the art of astrological judgments. Ptolemy also presents this division at the beginning of his Quadripartitum. And Daly in his commentary. The first kind is transmitted perfectly and completely as to principles and conclusions by Ptolemy in the Almagest. Or the first kind could be subdivided. The science of motions is twofold: some is instrumental, some tabular. That instrumental is twofold: because some are instruments for observing or investigating motions, such as Ptolemy's rules, armillary spheres, and similar things. Others are instruments for performing daily operations, such as the astrolabe, solid sphere, and similar things. The second kind, that is, the art of astrological judgments, has four principal parts. The first of which is concerning interrogations. The second concerning nativities. The third concerning the revolutions of years: and this is twofold, that is, concerning the revolutions of the years of the world and concerning the revolutions of the years of nativities. The fourth concerning elections. Daly Abéragel made a complete book on these four parts. Ptolemy, however, in the Quadripartitum, omitted two parts, that is, concerning interrogations and elections. But Daly, who commented on him, excuses him, saying: "These two parts can be sufficiently obtained from what Ptolemy says there." Besides these, there are some other parts of judgments, that is, concerning great conjunctions, concerning images, concerning seals, of which we have little or nothing. However, many ancient and modern authors, perceiving that these things were difficult to understand for those who first had to learn those sciences, made introductory books in which they set forth the principles and explained the terms that the masters of judgments use. Among other introductions, Alchabitius's book is the most approved among modern authors. Therefore, leaving others aside, we intend to deal with it for the present. Let us descend to the letter. requested by the lord. At the beginning of this book, seven things can be asked. First, what is the intention of the book. Second, what is its utility. Third, what is the title of the book. Fourth, to which part of philosophy it is subordinated. Fifth, when it should be read. Sixth, concerning the subject of the book. Seventh, concerning the division of the book. The intention of the book is to make clear the science of every thing whose science is necessary for the beginner to learn the science of the judgments of the stars. Its utility is clear: because everyone who wants to begin the science of judgments, the teaching of this book will be sufficient for him; which if he understands well, he will be able to understand all books of judgments by himself. The title of this book is as follows: "Here begin the Isagoges of Alchabitius to the science of the judgments of the stars." And it should be read before every book of the judgments of the stars. From what part it is, is clear from the preceding. For it is part of the science of the judgments of the stars. Its subject is that which is the subject in all judicial astronomy, that is, the celestial body insofar as through motion and light it causes generation and corruption in things existing under the orb of the moon. The division of the book will become clear in the process. This book is divided by the first division into two parts, namely, into a proemial part and an executive part. The executive part begins there: "In the name of the Lord, the zodiac, etc." The executive part is divided into five parts according to how the author divides it in the text, which he calls five differences, as will immediately become clear. The proemial part can be divided into four parts, because in the first, he invokes divine aid for the completion of his work; and with this, he seeks the goodwill of his king, at whose instance he perhaps composed this book. In the second part, he shows the cause of his book or the motive that moved him to make this book. In the third part, he excuses himself for the reasons. In the fourth part, he presents the division of his book. The second part begins there: "When he saw." The third part begins there: "I have not introduced." The fourth part begins there: "And I divided it into five differences." First, briefly, as a faithful man, he asks God for a long life, so that he can complete his work. And he asks for the durability of the honors of the king's sword and the preservation of his works and the expansion of his empire. "When I saw." In this part, he presents the causes that moved him to make this book. And he says that when he saw many of the ancients make introductory books to the science of the judgments of the stars, and some of them did not include all things necessary for introductions, and some transmitted what they transmitted too prolixly, so that they were lost among their confused sayings, that is, those things necessary for the introduction were obscured. And also some did not press in their sayings the order of discipline, placing first what should be placed first, and placing last what should be placed last, but did it first. He began to publish this book and collected in it from the sayings of the ancients those things that were necessary for the introduction, and omitted the useless. And "I have not introduced" here he excuses himself for the reasons and says that he did not include in this book the reasons that would be

[Ptolemy's Confirmation of Judgments]
It is necessary to defend what I have said: that these positions are in Ptolemy's book, without quadripartition. For there Ptolemy confirms judgments by many reasons. And he says that he made a book on the confirmation of judgments where he placed sufficient reasons for this. d iiij. Here he sets out the division of his book. And he says, 'And I divided it into these differences, as is clear from reading the letters.' The names of the lords. The zodiac. Indeed, the treatise begins when finished. And it can be divided into five parts, which are five differences according to how the author divides it in the letter. The first difference is about the essential and accidental being of the circle of signs. The second is about the natures of the seven planets. The third is what happens to the seven planets. The fourth is about explaining the terms or names that the masters of judgments use. The fifth is about the projection of parts. The second difference begins there: 'and with the help of God.' The third there: 'For the being of the planets.' The fourth there: 'The beginning of these.' The fifth there: 'and when I have noted.' The first part is divided into two, because in the first part he explains the essential being of the circle of signs. Secondly, about the accidental being. The second there. 'For the circle is formed at every hour.' The first part can be divided into four parts. In the first, he determines the division of the circle of signs and those things that follow that division. In the second part, he determines the dignities of the planets in the signs. In the third, about the figures of the signs. In the fourth, what the signs have from the limbs of man and what they have from regions and plants. The second part begins there: 'which the planets have.' The third there: 'these figures of the signs follow.' The fourth there: 'and one which.' The first part can be divided into five. In the first part, he sets out the division of the circle of signs. In the second part, he compares them to each other. In the third, he compares them to the four seasons of the year, and to the four ages, and to the four humors. In the fourth, he sets out the order of the planets and explains what he means when he says 'a planet is in a sign.' In the fifth, he adds something about the head and tail of the dragon. The second begins there: 'and six of these signs are northern.' The third there: 'and he calls them the fourth.' The fourth there: 'but to all planets.' The fifth there: 'it also signifies by the head and tail.' First, he says the circle of signs is divided into twelve equal parts which are called signs and are named by the names of the twelve images that are in the circle of signs, which are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. And each sign is divided into thirty equal parts which are called degrees. And each degree is divided into sixty, which are called minutes. And each minute into sixty, which are called seconds. And each second into sixty, which are called thirds. And each third into sixty, which are called fourths. And so on to infinity. Around this part, two doubts can be raised. The first is about the number of signs. The second is about the order. Albumazar disputes about the number of signs, saying: 'Some of those who thought differently from us contradicted the sayings of the ancients regarding the number of signs. And they said, 'Why do you suppose that there are twelve signs, neither more nor less?'' To these, Albumazar responds, saying: 'The philosopher Aratus revealed 48 images that are in the circle, i.e., in the eighth sphere, and their names. And all the ancient sages authorized his opinion and agreed with him on this. And twelve of these images are in the circle of signs. Therefore, they said there are twelve.' Albumazar assigns another reason, saying: 'Philosophers found that all things that are made and destroyed in this world are composed of elements, and every individual that is made from the four elements has three beings: beginning, middle, and end. Therefore, the four elements multiplied by three make twelve; therefore, there are twelve signs.' The third reason is that by the motion of the sun, generation and corruption occur in things. Its work is more desired in this world than the work of other planets. And it rotates in these twelve images, and they are its place. And according to its course in these twelve images, the seasons of the year vary. Therefore, philosophers placed twelve images as more worthy of signification. And they attributed universal signification to them. To the other thirty-six images, they attributed particular signification. The second doubt is about the order and the beginning. For someone might say, 'Why did they begin with Aries, since a circle has neither beginning nor end?' To this, Ptolemy says in the 156th proposition of the first part of the Quadripartite: 'The reason for beginning with Aries is that it is a masculine sign, and the agent is more worthy than the patient, and the equinoctial passes through it, and from there, with the equinoctial, the greatest change of the whole firmament begins.' But someone might say by this reason that the beginning should be from Libra, which is a masculine sign, the equinoctial passes through it, and the greatest motion of the firmament is there. Why then did they begin with Aries rather than Libra? It can be resolved by Ptolemy's statement in the 140th proposition of the first part, where he says that the beginning in the firmament is that place where the complexion of the time is more humid, just as the first age of animals is when the complexion is more humid. It could also be said that generation begins with Aries, but corruption with Libra. Regarding the order, someone might ask why they placed Taurus after Aries, and then Gemini, then Cancer. Albumazar says that there are four simple qualities of the elements, namely, heat, dryness, humidity, and coldness. And two of these are like agents, namely, heat and coldness, and the other two are like patients, namely, dryness and humidity. Agents are more worthy than patients, therefore they began with agents. And of the agents, one is the principle of generation, namely, heat; the other is the principle of corruption, namely, coldness. But a thing is generated before it is corrupted, therefore they placed Aries at the beginning, which is a hot and dry sign of the nature of fire, which is primarily hot. And they placed Cancer at the end, which is a cold and humid sign of the nature of water, which is primarily cold. And they placed Taurus after Aries, which is a cold and dry sign of the nature of earth, which is primarily dry, because the dryness of earth is suitable for the heat of fire. And they placed the sign of Gemini before Cancer, which is a hot and humid sign of the nature of air, which is primarily humid, and the humidity of air is suitable for the humidity of water. For the clarification of the aforesaid, it is to be understood that in the eighth sphere there are forty-eight images, in which there is agreement among all the ancients, as he said. And in them there are 1022 stars which are called fixed stars and all move with one motion, namely, with the motion of the eighth sphere, about one degree in a hundred years. And the ancients placed them in six orders, so that those that are larger they placed in the first order, and there are eleven. And those that are smaller than these they placed in the second order, and there are 45. And those that are smaller than these they placed in the third order, and there are 208. And those that are smaller than these they placed in the fourth order, and there are 474. And those that are smaller than these they placed in the fifth order, and there are 217. And those that are smaller than these they placed in the sixth order, and there are sixty-three. Of these 48 images, 12 are in the path of the sun, as has been said, and there are 346 stars in them. The names of these images are Aries, Taurus, etc. And there remain 36 images, of which 21 decline from the path of the sun to the north and 15 to the south. Those that decline to the north have 360 of the aforesaid stars. And the names of the images are these: The first is Ursa Minor. The second is Ursa Major. The third is Draco. The fourth is the burning or blazing dog. The fifth is the barking or howling dog.

[Northern and Southern Constellations]
The sixth is the northern crown. The seventh is the kneeling or genuflecting one. The eighth is the falling vulture. The ninth is the hen. The tenth is the seated one upon a seat. The eleventh is Algol, that is, the devil's head. The twelfth is the one holding the reins. The thirteenth is the serpent bearer. The fourteenth is the serpent. The fifteenth is the hunter. The sixteenth is the flying eagle. Another book has the flying vulture. The seventeenth is the dolphin. The eighteenth is the first horse. Another book has the horse's head. The nineteenth is the second horse. Another book has the winged horse. The twentieth is the woman who has not known a man. The twenty-first is the triangle. Those that decline to the south from the aforementioned stars are 216, whose imaginary names are these: The first of these is the sea lion, which some call the bear. The second is Algebar, that is, the strong dog. The third is the river. The fourth is the hare. The fifth is Canis Major. The sixth is Canis Minor. The seventh is Noah's Ark. The eighth is the serpent. The ninth is the vase. The tenth is the comb. The eleventh is the one bearing the lion, and its middle part is of human figure and the other of a horse. The twelfth is the leopard. The thirteenth is the thuribles. The fourteenth is the southern crown. The fifteenth is the southern fish. And six of these signs are thus prayed by the author to the signs in turn. And I divided them into three parts. First, I compare them to the parts of the world, or this to the declinations. Second, I show them to the ascensions. Third, I show them to the qualities. The first is at the beginning. The second is there: and six of them are said to ascend directly. The third is there: and it is called the middle. First, it says that six of the aforementioned 12 signs are northern, because they decline from the equinoctial line towards the northern pole, that is, from the beginning of Aries to the end of Virgo. And the other six, that is, from the beginning of Libra to the end of Pisces, are southern, because they decline from the equinoctial line towards the southern pole. According to this part, it is to be understood that the equinoctial is the circle that the sun describes by the rapture of the firmament, that is, by diurnal motion when it is in the first point of Aries, and it describes the same in the first point of Libra. Therefore, it is called by Ptolemy the equator of day and night, because at that time day and night are of the same length throughout the world where the sun rises and sets. I say this because there are two places in the world above which the sun neither rises nor sets, which is in Aries or Libra, one of which is under the arctic pole and the other under the antarctic pole. Here that question could be moved: whether there is habitation under the equator. It seems not. For where there is perpetual heat, there is no habitation; but under the equator there is perpetual heat. For the sun always runs over that part and declines little from it. Also, the author of the sphere says that there are five zones in the sky, one of which is the torrid zone, that is, according to him, under the equator and from both sides up to the tropics, and two under the poles and two temperate. There he wants three of them to be uninhabitable, namely the torrid zone because of excessive heat, and the two existing under the poles because of excessive cold, and the other two are habitable because they are temperate. Briefly, I believe with Avicenna that there is habitation under the equator, and the best habitation. And briefly I put one reason that moved me. There is the best habitation where there is the greatest temperateness; but under the equator there is the greatest temperateness; therefore, etc. The major is known. I declare the minor: for under the equator day and night are equal, as has been said, and the air can be cooled as much at night as it is heated during the day. Also, the sun's declination varies most there. For the declination changes in one day by 24 minutes, so it can hardly happen that the sun passes directly over their heads, for this does not happen unless the sun enters Aries or Libra directly at noon. Also, the sun never remains at the same altitude above them; but immediately, if there was motion, the altitude would vary in an instant. For as quickly as the prime mover moves, it approaches the meridian and recedes from the meridian. And where great heating is to occur, it is necessary that the rays penetrate for some time, as we see in a burning mirror, if the mirror were moved, it would not ignite straws or anything else that was opposed. Also, cold planets restrain the heat of the hot ones there, because all are always near there, although some say that planets do not cause cold, but their coldness is less heat. In truth, I do not believe this, with all due respect to them. For I have seen that the same cause of cold does not produce as much cold in very northern parts as it does in less northern parts. It could also be proven by reason. If it were so that no planet influenced cold, but lacked heat, it would follow that the presence of Saturn in summer would make summer hot, because such an addition to such makes it more such; but we do not see this, why, etc. And if someone were to say that its lesser heat tempers the greater heat of the sun, like warm water with hot. This is not valid, because there is a material mixture. In celestial influences, however, there is a virtual mixture. And it is to be imagined in influences of greater and lesser heat as of two fires heating a pot, one of which is stronger than the other. It is certain that the lesser fire will not cool the pot nor hinder the stronger fire in its heating. The reasons in opposition are solved: for what says that there is perpetual heat there. I say that there is not perpetual heat there that impedes habitation. I deny the author of the sphere in this matter. And six of them are said to ascend directly. It could be divided, but there is no force. It briefly says that 6 signs from the aforesaid signs ascend directly, and 6 obliquely. They ascend directly from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Sagittarius. The other 6 ascend obliquely. This is from the treatise on the sphere, so it is not to be stood here. Afterwards, it says that the tortuous or obliquely ascending signs obey the directly ascending ones. According to this, it is to be noted that if two are born at certain times in which all other significations are equal as to the superior and also inferior root, but one is born under a directly ascending sign and the other under an obliquely or tortuously ascending sign, the one who was born under the oblique will obey the other who was born under the direct sign, as long as those signs are of the same longitude from the beginning of Cancer. For example: he who was born under Gemini will obey him who was born under Cancer; and he who was under Taurus, him who was under Leo; and he who was under Aries, him who was under Virgo, and so on for the others. Afterwards, it says that any two signs that are of the same longitude from the beginning of Aries are said to be concordant, like Pisces and Aries, Aquarius and Taurus, Capricorn and Gemini, and so on for the others. And it can be applied as before. And this is because the ascensions of those signs are equal. And this is what the author of the treatise on the sphere says: any two signs equally distant from either of the equinoctial points are equal in their ascensions. Afterwards, it says that the half of the circle that is from the beginning of Leo to the end of Capricorn is called the maximum half because of the ascensions. And it is the sun's half: because Leo is the house of the sun and the ascensions begin to increase notably there. And the sun has dignity in that whole half, like the planets in their terms. And the other half is the moon's, that is, from the beginning of Aquarius to the end of Cancer: and that is called the minimum half because the ascensions begin to be notably named there. And the moon has dignity there which the sun has in the maximum. From above.

[The Houses of the Planets]
And it is called the midpoint. That is, it compares the signs to each other as to their qualities in general. And it briefly says that the midpoint from the beginning of Aries to the end of Virgo is the hot midpoint, because it makes summer for us. And the other midpoint is cold, because it makes winter for us. It compares these to the four seasons, and to the four ages, and to the four humors or complexions. And it says that the fourth part, which is from the beginning of Aries to the beginning of Cancer, is hot and humid, like spring and like childhood and like the sanguine complexion. And the other fourth part, which is from the beginning of Cancer to the beginning of Libra, is hot and dry, like summer and like the second age and like the choleric complexion. And the other fourth part, which is from the beginning of Libra to the beginning of Capricorn, is cold and dry, like autumn and like the third age, which is the beginning of diminution, and like the melancholic complexion. And the fourth part, which is from the beginning of Capricorn to the end of Pisces, is cold and humid, like winter and like the last age and the phlegmatic complexion. It arranges the seven planets. It is taken from when a planet is in a sign, and it is clear in the letter. But note here the threefold acceptance of the sign as the author of the sphere states, because you will find it there, I do not put it here. The planets have. The author first determined the division of the circle of signs, and some things that follow that division. Here he wants to determine the dignities of the planets in the signs. And it is divided into two. Because first he determines the essential dignities. Second, the accidental ones. This part is there: and also concerning the accidental planets at the end of this difference. The first part is divided into two: because in the first he does what has been said, that is, he determines the dignities of the planets in the signs. In this part he determines the strengths they have in these dignities. As there: and because now, with God's help. The first part is divided into five parts according to the five dignities: because first he determines the dignity of the planets which is called the house. Second, the dignity which is called exaltation. Third, the dignity which is called triplicity. Fourth, the dignity which is called term. Fifth, the dignity which is called face. As there: these are the exaltations. These are the triplicities, we distinguish them thus. Fourth there: also in each sign. Fifth there: the faces of the signs. The first part can be divided into two parts: because in the first part it shows the houses of the planets. In the second part, each of them, except the Sun and Moon, has two houses, one of which is more principal, and that is called joy, and it shows which are those houses in which they rejoice. As there: the signs in which. The first is divided into two. First it sets out to determine the dignities of the planets and sets out the division in the letter. Second, it follows there: these are the houses. It says that the planets have in the aforesaid signs certain dignities or powers by nature and certain by accident. Those that are by nature are house, exaltation, triplicity, term, and face. But concerning these dignities which they have by accident, he will speak later. These are the houses. It says that Aries and Scorpio are the houses of Mars, and Virgo is the house of Mercury: Cancer is the house of the Moon: Leo is the house of the Sun: Sagittarius and Pisces are the houses of Jupiter: Capricorn and Aquarius are the houses of Saturn. Afterwards it says that the seventh sign from the house of any planet is called its detriment: for example, just as Leo is the house of the Sun, so Aquarius, which is the sign opposite to Leo, is the detriment of the Sun: and understand the same for the others. Then it says that the two signs which are the house of one planet are in agreement in the girdle, that is, in the circle of signs or the zodiac, which is wide in the middle and narrow at the poles. To understand this, it is necessary to imagine circles passing through the beginnings of the signs and through the poles of the zodiac, and the entire space comprehended between any two circles is one sign, as was exemplified in the preceding lecture. This agreement seems to me to do little to explain why two signs should be the house of one planet, because any two signs agree in that way. Therefore, the author's words can be explained or glossed differently, that any two signs which are the house of one planet agree in the zodiac as to their distance from the houses of the luminaries: and in that way it is true: for example, Gemini and Virgo are the houses of Mercury, and they are equally distant from Leo and Cancer, which are the houses of the luminaries, and Taurus and Libra, which are the houses of Venus, are equally distant from Leo and Cancer. And you will find this agreement in all. Ptolemy assigns the reason why Leo is the house of the Sun and Cancer is the house of the Moon, and similarly for the others in the 173rd proposition and the following 7th and 6th propositions of the first part concerning the houses of the luminaries, the Sun and Moon. He says that the two northern signs which are closer to our zenith, and for this reason cause heat, which are Cancer and Leo, were placed as the houses of the two great and noble luminaries. Leo, because it is masculine, is the house of the Sun, and Cancer, because it is feminine, is the house of the Moon. Others say in the commentary, explaining the aforesaid words, that the two northern signs are Cancer and Gemini: but Gemini is a hot and humid sign. Therefore it does not agree with any of them. In that it moistens, it does not agree with the Sun, which heats and dries: nor with the Moon, which is feminine and nocturnal. But the sign of Gemini is masculine and diurnal. But Leo agrees with the Sun, which is a hot and dry sign. Therefore it is fitting that Leo should be the house of the Sun, and because the Moon follows the Sun, therefore it is fitting that the house of the Moon should be near the house of the Sun. Then someone might say, why then is Virgo not the house of the Moon, since it is near Leo, which is the house of the Sun? Balinus says that the sign of Virgo is not suitable for the Moon: because Virgo is a dry sign, but the Moon is humid. And for this reason they placed Cancer, which is humid, as the house of the Moon. For the houses of the other planets, he assigns two reasons: one is taken from the order of the planets and signs. The other from the aspects. Briefly, to conclude his intention in a few words, he wants to say that Capricorn and Aquarius are the houses of Saturn, because these two signs are most distant from the houses of the luminaries, and Saturn is superior to all planets. And Sagittarius and Pisces are the houses of Jupiter: because these two signs are next to the houses of Saturn: just as Jupiter is below Saturn. Scorpio and Aries are the houses of Mars: because they are next to the houses of Jupiter, just as Mars is below Jupiter. Libra and Taurus are the houses of Venus for the same reason. And Virgo and Gemini are the houses of Mercury. And if you start the order from the inferior, you will find the same: for example, Virgo and Gemini are next to the houses of the luminaries and are the houses of Mercury: because Mercury follows the Moon in order: and so for the others. The other reason he assigns is taken from the aspects, and he wants to say that Saturn is greater in fortune: therefore his houses should be distant from the houses of the luminaries by an opposing aspect.

[Planetary Houses and Exaltations]
which is an aspect of perfect enmity. In this way, Capricorn and Aquarius are distant. For Capricorn is in opposition to the Moon's domicile, namely Cancer, and Aquarius is in opposition to the Sun's domicile, namely Leo. And Jupiter is the greater fortune; its domicile should be distant from the luminaries' domiciles by a trine aspect, that is, an aspect of perfect friendship. In this way, Sagittarius and Pisces are distant: for Sagittarius aspects Leo with a trine aspect, and Pisces aspects Cancer. And Mars is the lesser fortune; its domicile should be distant from the luminaries' domiciles by a square aspect, which is an aspect of medium enmity. In this way, Scorpio and Aries are distant: for Scorpio aspects Leo with a square aspect, and Aries aspects Cancer. Venus is the lesser fortune; its domicile should be distant from the luminaries' domiciles by a sextile aspect, which is an aspect of medium friendship. In this way, Libra and Taurus are distant: for Libra aspects Leo with a sextile aspect, and Taurus aspects Cancer. And the two remaining signs are left for Mercury, namely Virgo and Gemini, which are near the domiciles of the luminaries, because Mercury can never be more than one sign distant from the Sun; indeed, according to the equations of the Alfonsine Tables, it cannot be more than 28 degrees and 7 minutes distant from the Sun. The dignities in which each of the five planets has domiciles show which is the principal domicile of each of them. It says that Saturn rejoices in Aquarius, Jupiter in Sagittarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Taurus, Mercury in Virgo. These are the exaltations. It says the Sun is exalted in the 19th degree of Aries, etc. The text is clear. Ptolemy assigns the exaltations of the planets in the 19th proposition of the first part of the Quadripartitum and in the 6th following. He wants to say that the 19th degree of Aries is the exaltation of the Sun because when the Sun enters Aries, the days begin to increase over the nights, and its heat begins to appear more there. And Libra is its fall, because there the nights begin to increase over the days, and the heat begins to diminish there. And because Saturn is opposite to the Sun, because where heat increases, cold diminishes, and vice versa, therefore Libra is the exaltation of Saturn, and Aries is its fall. And when the Moon conjoins the Sun in Aries, its light first begins to appear in Taurus; therefore Taurus is the exaltation of the Moon, and Scorpio is its fall, because it is the opposite sign. And because Jupiter causes northern winds, and Cancer is a northern sign, therefore Cancer is the exaltation of Jupiter, and the opposite sign, namely Capricorn, is its fall. And because Mars is naturally scorching, and especially when it is in Capricorn, it burns much more, as it inclines to the southern part, therefore Capricorn is its exaltation, and it is the sign opposite to Jupiter's exaltation, and Cancer is its fall. And because Venus naturally humidifies, and especially when it is in Pisces, Pisces is the exaltation of Venus, and the opposite sign, namely Virgo, is its fall. And because Mercury dries by itself, and in this is contrary to Venus, therefore Virgo is its exaltation, which is the sign opposite to Venus's exaltation, and Pisces is its fall. Albumazar assigns almost the same causes, although he uses different words, and he received them from Ptolemy; therefore, let these suffice concerning the causes of domiciles and exaltations. First, the author determined concerning the domiciles and exaltations of the planets. Here he determines concerning the triplicities. And because aspects accompany triplicities, he therefore determines subsequently concerning the aspects of the signs. And according to this, this part can be divided into two parts. In the first, he determines concerning the triplicities. In the second, concerning the aspects, there, "secondly, the signs are said to aspect each other." The first part can be divided into two. In the first, he does what has been said. In the second, he shows which signs are movable, which fixed, and which common. The second part begins there: "four of these signs." The first part is divided into four parts according to the four triplicities. The second part begins there: "triplicity." The third part begins there: "triplicity." The fourth part begins there: "fourth triplicity." The first part is divided into two. In the first, he determines concerning the triplicities in general. In the second, in particular. The first part begins at the beginning. The second part begins there: "Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius." He says first that all three signs that are of the same nature make one triplicity. Afterwards, he says that Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius make the first triplicity, because these three signs are of the same nature, namely fiery, masculine, diurnal, choleric, hot and dry, bitter in taste, and these three signs are oriental. And this triplicity, like any of the others, has three lords who are called the lords of the triplicity. The first lord of this triplicity in nativities or questions or any other matters that occur during the day is the Sun. The second is Jupiter. The third is Saturn. In matters that occur at night, the first lord of this triplicity is Jupiter. The second is the Sun. The third is Saturn. It should be noted here what Albumazar says in his introduction, that the first sign of this triplicity, namely Aries, produces temperate heat. The second, namely Leo, produces scorching heat. The third, namely Sagittarius, produces corrupting heat. When any of these signs falls in the ascendant of a conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon in winter, the cold is tempered. In summer, there is excessive heat, especially if the lord of that sign is present in that sign or in any of the angles aspecting the ascendant. Afterwards, he says that Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn make the second triplicity because they are of the same nature, for all three are feminine, nocturnal, earthy, cold and dry, melancholic, sour in taste, southern. The lords of this triplicity during the day are: first Venus, then the Moon, then Mars. And at night: the Moon first, then Venus, then Mars. Albumazar says that the first sign of this triplicity produces temperate cold, strengthening animals and crops. The second produces harmful cold. The third produces corrupting cold. When any of these signs falls in the ascendant of a conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon in winter, and especially Capricorn, there is great cold, especially if Saturn is in that triplicity. Then he says that Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius make the third triplicity because they are of the same nature: for they are masculine, diurnal, sanguine, hot and humid, airy, western, sweet in taste. Their lords during the day are: first Saturn, second Mercury, third Jupiter. At night: first Mercury, second Saturn, third Jupiter. And Albumazar says that the first sign of this triplicity produces temperate, strengthening, and sweet winds. The second produces harmful winds. The third produces winds that dissipate animals and crops. When any of these is the ascendant at the hour of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, winds move in that lunation. And similarly understand this concerning the opposition. Afterwards, he says that Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces make the fourth triplicity because all three are feminine, nocturnal, northern, watery, cold and humid, salty in taste. Their lords during the day are: first Venus, second Mars, third the Moon. At night: first Mars, second Venus, third the Moon. Albumazar says that the first sign of this triplicity

[Rainfall Prediction from Conjunctions and Oppositions]
makes for temperate humidity. Secondly, abundant. Thirdly, destructive. When any of these signs are in the ascendant of a conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon, rain is to be expected in that month. For from this triplicity, and from Venus and the Moon, rains especially begin. Abraham Avenezra says that if, in the conjunction or opposition preceding the Sun's entry into Aries, whether it be a conjunction or opposition, any of these signs is ascending, and with this the luminaries are in the angles (i.e., in the ascendant, or midheaven, or in the occident, or in the angle of midnight), there will be excessive rain in that year. But if the luminaries are cadent from the angles, rain will not fall in that month and for the greater part of that year. And I have experienced many times that when the ascendant of the conjunction is a watery sign, and the Moon enters that sign before the opposition, on the same day that the Moon enters the degree that was in the ascendant, rain begins and lasts at least as long as the Moon remains in that sign. And in a similar way, you should understand this for windy and cold signs. I found this by experience, but afterwards I found this in the book of Abraham Avenezra, and I rejoiced greatly because I was more certain of the truth. But Abraham says that it is especially true if the ascending sign is one of the angles of the figure of that land. I understand this concerning the figure of the revolution of that year in that land. For it varies according to different regions. And if it is not one of the angles of the figure of that land, there will be clouds without rain. These triplicities are almost the same as the causes of the houses, which I pass over. Four of these signs are also called bicorporeal, and there are movable, fixed, and common signs. And it assigns them and gives examples. The letter is plain. It should be noted here that Ptolemy says in the 22nd proposition of the Centiloquium: 'To make or use new clothes when the Moon is in Leo is to be feared.' And Paulus says in his commentary on the same proposition that all fixed signs are prohibited for this, and especially Leo, which, besides being fixed, is a sign of great victories and signifies the victory of all kings who exercise and have bad dominion over them. And he says that to 'make' Ptolemy intends to cut and sew. By 'use' he intends to wear and utilize. From this we can derive a rule that all things we wish to be fixed we should begin when the Moon is in a fixed sign, such as building houses and so on. And things we wish to change quickly we should begin when the Moon is in a movable sign, such as traveling and so on. Now the signs aspect each other. The author has determined concerning the dignity of the planets, which he calls triplicities. And because triplicity is taken from a trine aspect, therefore in this incidental part he determines concerning aspects, and it can be divided into two parts: in the first part he determines concerning aspects. In this part, concerning the projections of rays. The second part begins there: 'When a planet is in any sign.' The first part can be divided into four parts according to the four aspects. In the first, he determines concerning the sextile aspect. In the second part, concerning the square aspect. In the third, concerning the trine. In the fourth, concerning the opposition. The second part begins there: 'and it aspects the square before it.' The third part there: 'it also aspects the trine before it.' The fourth part there: 'it also aspects the seventh.' He says first that the signs aspect each other in this way: Every sign aspects the third sign after it and the third sign before it, just as Aries aspects the sign of Gemini, which is the third before it, and the sign of Aquarius, which is the third after it. And this aspect is called sextile because it holds the sixth part of the circle, i.e., 60 degrees, which is the quantity of two signs, and this aspect is called an aspect of medium friendship, and it can be the reason why any two signs distant in this way agree in one quality and with this in sex. For example, Aries and Gemini agree in heat and masculinity, and similarly Aries and Aquarius. Taurus and Cancer agree in coldness and femininity, and similarly Taurus and Pisces, and so you should understand for all. Afterwards he says that every sign aspects the fourth before it and the fourth after it, and this aspect is called tetragon or square because it holds the fourth part of the circle, i.e., 90 degrees, which is the quantity of three signs. And this aspect is called an aspect of medium enmity, because any two signs distant in this way sometimes disagree in one quality, sometimes in both; they also disagree in sex, for if one of them is masculine, the other will be feminine. And this is the reason why in acute diseases, for the most part, a crisis occurs when the Moon comes to the fourth aspect of the place where it was at the beginning of the disease, especially if there is a disagreement in both qualities; and commonly then a salutary crisis occurs. For example, if the Moon was at the beginning of the illness in any of the signs of the fiery triplicity, especially in Aries, when it comes to the fourth sign, which disagrees in both qualities and in sex, commonly a crisis occurs for health, just as if it was in Aries, the fourth aspect will be in Cancer; if in Leo, the fourth aspect will be in Scorpio; if in Sagittarius, the fourth aspect will be in Pisces. In other signs, however, there is no disagreement except in one quality and in sex. For example: Taurus and Leo: Taurus is a cold and dry feminine sign. Leo is a hot and dry masculine sign. And you will find this disagreement in others in their own way. And because of this, crises in these signs sometimes occur for health and sometimes for death, according to the fortunate or unfortunate aspect to the Moon. Then he says that every sign aspects the fifth before it and the fifth after it, and this aspect is called trine because it holds the third part of the circle, i.e., 120 degrees. And this aspect is called an aspect of perfect friendship, because any three signs distant in this way form one triplicity and agree in natures, as was said in the immediately preceding chapter. Afterwards he says: every sign also aspects the seventh from itself, i.e., the opposite sign; and this is an aspect of perfect enmity by reason of opposition. And every planet that is in any degree of any sign aspects a planet existing in another sign in a similar degree with the same aspect with which those two signs aspect each other. And the author speaks of 30 degrees of the zodiac; but according to Ptolemy's doctrine, aspects are taken in the equinoctial; therefore the letter can be glossed in this way. And this is to be understood of the degrees of the equinoctial. For example: if any planet is in Aries and another in Gemini, and the ascensions of the direct circle of the one in Aries have been subtracted from the ascensions of the direct circle of the one in Gemini, if 60 degrees remain, they aspect each other with a sextile aspect. In this way, understand for other aspects. In this, the author, 'when a planet is,' briefly explains himself by saying: If any planet is in any sign, it projects its rays in a similar degree of the sign that aspects it with some aspect. For example: if any planet is in the first degree of Aries and in the second minute, it projects its sextile rays to the first degree of Gemini in its second minute. The author was too brief in this chapter, therefore it is necessary to dwell a little on the explanation of aspects and the projection of rays. It must first be understood that aspects are considered in three ways. In one way, according to equal degrees, and according to this mode the author in the text spoke of aspects and their projection.

[Three Ways of Considering Aspects]
There are three ways of considering aspects and the projection of rays. One way is to consider aspects and the projection of rays according to the degrees of the zodiacal circle, that is, by computing the degrees of the zodiac that are between one planet and another. This is the method that the author presents in his book, and Abraham ibn Ezra also holds this method. He says that it has been proven almost infinitely that aspects should be taken in the zodiac and not in the equinoctial, and this method is very easy. It has been sufficiently exemplified in the letter. The second way is to consider aspects in the equinoctial ascensions of the direct circle, according to which Ptolemy instructs to take them, as was said above in the letter. If, therefore, you wish to equate aspects according to this method, seek the ascensions of the planet in the direct circle, which begin from Capricorn, and keep them. Then, in the same way, seek the ascensions of the degree of the other planet in the same direct circle, and keep them. Then subtract the ascensions of the one that is closer to Capricorn according to the order of the signs from the ascensions of the one that is farther away. If 60 degrees remain, they aspect each other with a sextile aspect. If 90 degrees remain, they aspect each other with a quartile aspect. And if 120 degrees remain, they aspect each other with a trine aspect. For an opposition aspect, however, it is not necessary to seek ascensions, because two planets that are opposite in the zodiac are also opposite in the equinoctial. This method is easy, therefore it is not necessary to dwell much on it here. The third method of aspects and the projection of rays is very difficult, especially for those not practiced in calculations. It must first be understood concerning this method that the projection of rays is taken according to the ascensions of the direct circle if the planet whose rays we wish to project is in the midheaven or in the angle of the earth. And if it is in the degree of the ascendant or in the degree of the descendant, it is taken according to the ascensions of the region or horizon, using tables made for that region. If, however, the planet is not in any of these four places, but in intermediate places, then the radiations are taken mixed. Therefore, when you wish to project rays to a planet, consider if the planet whose rays you wish to project is in the midheaven or in the angle of the earth. Then seek the ascensions of that degree in the direct circle. To these, add 60 degrees if you want a left sextile radiation, that which precedes according to the order of the signs from the place of the planet. And reduce the degrees obtained after the addition to equal degrees in the direct circle according to the doctrine of the canons of the primum mobile. The zodiacal degree that results in that place is the sextile ray. And just as I said 60 degrees for the sextile radiation, so understand 90 for the quartile radiation and 120 for the trine radiation. If, however, you want right radiations, that is, those that precede from the place of the planet towards the west, subtract from the ascensions of the planet's degree 60 degrees for the sextile radiation, or 90 for the quartile radiation, or 120 for the trine radiation. And reduce the remaining number to equal degrees as before, and the zodiacal degree that results in that place is the ray. For example, in a left radiation, I assume that Saturn is in the angle of the midheaven at the end of the sixth degree of Virgo. The ascensions of that degree in the direct circle are 247 degrees and 48 minutes. I want to have a sextile radiation, so I add 60 degrees, which gives 307 degrees and 48 minutes. I reduce these to equal degrees in the direct circle, and they result in 10 degrees, 14 minutes, and 14 seconds of Scorpio. There are the left sextile rays of Saturn in this case. For example, in a right sextile radiation, I subtract 60 degrees from the aforementioned ascensions, and 187 degrees and 48 minutes remain. I reduce these to equal degrees in the direct circle, and they result in 7 degrees, 9 minutes, and 15 seconds of Cancer. There, therefore, are the right sextile rays of Saturn. If, however, the planet whose rays you wish to project is in the degree of the ascendant, seek the ascensions of the planet's degree from the table of ascensions of the oblique circle serving your region. And if you want a left radiation, add to the ascensions of the planet's degree 60 degrees for a sextile radiation, or 90 for a quartile radiation, or 120 for a trine radiation. For example, in a left sextile radiation, I assume that Jupiter is in the degree of the ascendant at the end of the 10th degree of Sagittarius. The ascensions of that degree in the oblique horizon are 275 degrees and 27 minutes. I want to have a left sextile radiation, so I add 60 degrees to them, and 335 degrees and 27 minutes result. I reduce these to equal degrees in the oblique circle, and they result in 12 degrees, 44 minutes, and 21 seconds of Aquarius. There, therefore, are the sextile rays of Jupiter. For example, in a right sextile radiation, I subtract 60 degrees from the ascensions of Jupiter's degree, and 215 degrees and 27 minutes remain. I reduce these to equal degrees, and they result in 25 degrees, 54 minutes, and 50 seconds of Libra. There are the sextile rays of Jupiter. If, however, the planet is in the degree of the descendant, you will work with the opposite degree. That is, you will take the ascensions of the nadir of the planet's degree in the oblique horizon and proceed in the same way as before. But after you have reduced to equal degrees, the place of the ray is the place opposite to the place you find. And to make it clearer, I will give an example. I assume that Jupiter is in the degree of the descendant at the end of the 10th degree of Sagittarius. I seek the ascensions of the 10th degree of Gemini and find 41 degrees and 9 minutes. I add 60 degrees for a sextile radiation, and 101 degrees and 9 minutes result. I reduce these to equal degrees in the oblique horizon, and they result in 2 degrees, 30 minutes, and 45 seconds of Leo. Therefore, the rays are in the opposite of this, that is, 2 degrees, 30 minutes, and 45 seconds of Aquarius. If, however, the planet whose rays you wish to project is not in any of the aforementioned places, then it is necessary to take the radiations in a mixed way, according to the proportion of the distance of the planet's degree between one angle and another. The method is this: if the planet whose rays you wish to project is between the midheaven and the ascendant degree, first take the ascensions of the midheaven degree. Then subtract from the ascensions of the planet's degree in the direct circle, and what remains is the distance from the midheaven, which you keep. Then, to the ascensions of the planet's degree in the direct circle, add 60 degrees for a sextile radiation, or 90 for a quartile radiation, or 120 for a trine radiation. And reduce what results to equal degrees in the direct circle, and what results, keep and call it the radiation of the direct circle. Then seek the ascensions of the planet's degree in the oblique horizon using the table of your region. To these, add 60 degrees for a sextile radiation, or 90 for a quartile radiation, or 120 for a trine radiation. And reduce what results to equal degrees using the tables of your region, and what results, keep and call it the radiation of the region. Then see the difference between the radiation of the direct circle and the radiation of the region. Multiply this difference by the distance of the planet's degree from the midheaven.

[Calculating Planetary Rays]
Divide the product by half the arc of the planet's diurnal degree. The proportional part will be obtained, which you add to the radiation of the direct circle. If the radiation of the direct circle is less than the radiation of the region, subtract it from itself if it is greater. What results will be the place of the rays. You will find half the arc of the planet's diurnal degree by subtracting the ascensions of the planet's degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of its nadir and halving that. It could also be found in another way, the proportional part of the two radiations, namely, by taking a sixth part of the day and multiplying it by the hours of the planet's distance from the midheaven. But this method is more tedious than the first, because according to this method, it is necessary to divide the distance of the planet's degree from the meridian by the parts of the hours of the planet's degree to find the hours of distance from the meridian. I advise the first method. I give an example in this: let the degree of the midheaven be 20 degrees of Leo completed, and Saturn be in the sixth degree of Virgo completed. I seek the distance of Saturn from the midheaven by the ascensions of the direct circle. And I find the distance to be 15 degrees, 22 minutes. I will keep this. Then I subtract the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of the opposite degree. And there remain 201 degrees, 20 minutes, which is the entire diurnal arc of Saturn, which I will divide in half. And 100 degrees, 40 minutes result, which is half the diurnal arc of Saturn; I will keep this. Then I seek the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the direct circle, and I find 247 degrees, 48 minutes, to which I add 60 degrees, because I want the sextile sinister radiation. And 307 degrees, 48 minutes will result, which I reduce to equal degrees in the direct circle, and I find 10 degrees, 14 minutes, 14 seconds of Scorpio. And this is the radiation of the direct circle. Then I seek the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the oblique circle in the region whose latitude is 48 degrees. And I find 147 degrees, 11 minutes, to which I add 60 degrees, and 207 degrees, 11 minutes result, which I reduce to equal degrees in the oblique circle, and I find 19 degrees, 52 minutes, 14 seconds of Libra. I see that the radiation of the direct circle is greater than the radiation of the region. I subtract the smaller from the larger, and I find in the difference 20 degrees, 22 minutes, which I reduce to the same kind; and 1222 result. I also reduce the distance of Saturn from the midheaven to the same kind. The distance was 15 degrees, 22 minutes, reduced to the same kind, 920 minutes. I will multiply the difference by the distance, and 26684 seconds result. Then I reduce half the diurnal arc of Saturn to the same kind. Half the diurnal arc was 100 degrees, 40 minutes, reduced to the same kind, 6040 minutes, by which I divide the number that resulted from the multiplication. And three degrees, 6 minutes, 32 seconds will result, which I subtract from the radiation of the direct circle, because that was greater, and there remain seven degrees, 7 minutes, 42 seconds of Scorpio. There are the sinister sextile rays of Saturn in the proposed case. If, however, I wanted the dexter radiation, where I instructed to add 60 degrees, I would subtract 60, and proceed as before. If, however, the degree of the planet whose rays you wish to project is between the ascending degree and the angle of the earth, see its longitude from the ascending degree, which you will know in this way: Subtract the ascensions of the ascending degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of the planet's degree in the same oblique circle. And if you want the sinister radiation, what remains will be the distance of the planet from the ascending degree. Then seek half the nocturnal arc of the planet's degree, which you will know in this way: Subtract the ascensions of the planet's nadir degree from the ascensions of the planet's degree, and the entire nocturnal arc will remain, which you halve. Having observed these things, seek the ascensions of the planet's degree in the oblique circle by a table made for the latitude of your region, to which add 60 for the sextile radiation. And what results, reduce to equal degrees in the oblique circle, and let it be called the radiation of the oblique circle. Then seek the ascensions of the planet's degree in the direct circle, to which add 60 degrees for the sextile radiation and the others, and what results, reduce to equal degrees in the direct circle, and keep what results, and let it be called the radiation of the direct circle. Then see the difference between the radiation of the region and the direct circle, by subtracting the smaller from the larger; multiply this difference by the distance of the planet from the ascending degree. And divide the product by half the nocturnal arc of the planet's degree, and the proportional part will emerge, which you add to the radiation of the region if it is less than the radiation of the direct circle, or subtract from the radiation of the region if it is greater than the radiation of the direct circle. And what results after addition or subtraction will be the place of the rays. I give an example in this: let the ascending degree be 18 Scorpio, Jupiter be in 10 Sagittarius. I seek the ascensions of the ascending degree in the horizon of 48 degrees, and I find 245 degrees, 55 minutes. Then I seek the ascensions of Jupiter's degree in the same oblique horizon, and I find 275 degrees, 27 minutes. I subtract the ascensions of the ascending degree from the ascensions of Jupiter's degree, and there remain 29 degrees, 32 minutes, which is the distance of Jupiter from the ascendant. Then I subtracted the ascensions of Jupiter's opposite degree from the ascensions of Jupiter's degree, and I halved the remainder, and I found 117 degrees, 9 minutes, which is half the nocturnal arc of Jupiter's degree. Then I added 60 degrees to Jupiter's ascensions, and 335 degrees, 27 minutes resulted, which I reduced to equal degrees in the oblique circle, and I found 12 degrees, 45 minutes of Aquarius. And this is the radiation of the region; so I kept it. Then I sought the ascensions of Jupiter's degree in the direct circle, and I found 338 degrees, 21 minutes, to which I added 60 degrees, and 398 degrees, 21 minutes resulted. I subtracted one revolution, i.e., 360 degrees, and 38 degrees, 21 minutes remained, which I reduced to equal degrees in the direct circle, and I found 50 degrees, 57 minutes of Aquarius; and this is the radiation of the direct circle. Then I subtracted the smaller radiation from the larger, and I found in the difference 6 degrees, 48 minutes, which difference I multiplied by the distance of Jupiter from the ascendant, and I divided by half the nocturnal arc, and I found in the proportional part 1 degree, 42 minutes, 47 seconds, which I subtracted from the radiation of the region, because that was greater. And after subtraction, there remained 11 degrees, 2 minutes, 13 seconds of Aquarius; and there is the place of Jupiter's rays. If, however, you wished to project the rays to the right, then you should see the distance of the planet's degree from the angle of the earth by the ascensions of the direct circle, which you will find by subtracting the ascensions of the planet's degree in the direct circle from the ascensions of the angle of the earth in the direct circle. And then you should add the proportional part of the two radiations to the radiation of the direct circle if it were less than the radiation of the region, or subtract if it were greater. In no other way does the operation differ, except where I instructed to add 60 degrees to the ascensions, etc., and to subtract 60, etc. If, however, the degree of the planet whose rays you wish to project is between the occidental degree and the degree of the 10th house, you will proceed with the opposite degree of the planet directly by the same way, as I have already said between the ascendant and the angle of the earth. For when the planet's degree is between the occidental degree and the midheaven, its opposite is between the ascendant and the angle of the earth.

[Calculating Planetary Rays Beyond the Angle]
The degree is between the ascendant and the angle of the earth. And the degree opposite the planet is as far from the ascendant as the degree of the planet is from the degree of the occident: that is the same operation: neither more nor less. But after you have completed the operations, the place of the rays is the place opposite to that place which you found, as I exemplified to you: when the planet is in the degree of the occident. But if it happens, as it often happens, that the degree of the planet is before the angle: the place where its rays fall is beyond the angle: as where the degree of the planet is between the midheaven and the ascendant and the rays fall beyond the ascendant, that is, between the ascendant and the angle of the earth. This case occurs almost frequently in trine radiation: and often in quartile: and sometimes in sextile. The method is this: if the place of the planet whose rays you wish to project is between the midheaven and the ascendant and its rays should fall beyond the ascendant: see the distance of the planet from the midheaven by the method previously described: and see half the diurnal arc of the planet's degree by the method previously described and keep both, that is, the distance and half the diurnal arc. Then find the ascensions of the planet's degree in the direct circle. Also find the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the same direct circle. Then subtract the ascensions of the planet's degree from the ascensions of the ascendant's degree. And what remains, keep: and let it be called the part of the radiation of the direct circle. Then find the ascensions of the planet's degree in the oblique circle. And find the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the oblique circle: and subtract the ascensions of the planet from the ascensions of the ascendant's degree: and what remains, keep and let it be called the part of the radiation of the region. Then subtract the smaller part of the radiation from the larger and the difference remains, which multiply by the distance of the planet from the midheaven and divide the product by half the diurnal arc of the planet's degree and a proportional part will result, which add to the part of the radiation of the direct circle if it is smaller than the part of the radiation of the region. Or subtract if it is larger: and what results will be the equated part of the radiation: which if it is less than 60 degrees, the sextile rays fall beyond the angle; if it is greater, they fall before the angle. And if this part is less than 90 degrees, the quartile rays fall beyond the angle; if greater, they fall before the angle. And if this part is less than 120 degrees, as is almost frequently the case, the trine rays fall beyond the angle; if it is greater than 120, they fall before the angle. If therefore the rays fall beyond the angle, subtract the equated part of the radiation from 60 degrees for sextile radiation, or from 90 for quartile radiation: or from 120 for trine radiation: and what remains, add to the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the oblique circle and what results, reduce to equal degrees in the oblique circle and the degree of the sign that comes out will be the place of the rays. If you know this operation, you will know how to direct a planet existing in one quadrant to a place existing in another quadrant. I have not seen this method explained or placed in any book. So that what I have said may be clearer, I will put it in this example. I assume that the degree of the midheaven is 10 degrees Cancer and Saturn is in the fourth degree of Virgo: and the ascendant's degree in the oblique horizon in a region whose latitude is 48 degrees is 7 degrees 59 minutes Libra. I sought the ascensions of the midheaven's degree in the direct circle and found 190 degrees 53 minutes. Then I sought the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the direct circle and found 245 degrees 55 minutes. I subtracted the ascensions of the midheaven from the ascensions of Saturn's degree and 55 degrees 2 minutes remained: this is the distance of Saturn from the midheaven. Then I subtracted the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of the opposite degree in the same oblique circle and 203 degrees 3 minutes remained: and this was the diurnal arc of Saturn's degree which I bisected and found 101 degrees 31 minutes 30 seconds, which is half the diurnal arc of Saturn's degree. I subtracted the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the direct circle which were 245 degrees 55 minutes from the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the same direct circle which were 277 degrees 19 minutes and 31 degrees 24 minutes remained which was the part of the radiation of the direct circle. Then I subtracted the ascensions of Saturn's degree in the oblique circle which were 144 degrees 277 minutes from the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the same oblique circle which were 190 degrees 53 minutes: and 46 degrees 26 minutes remained which was the part of the radiation of the region or oblique circle: I saw that the part of the radiation of the oblique circle was greater than the part of the radiation of the direct circle. I therefore subtracted the smaller from the larger and 15 degrees 2 minutes remained which was the difference of the two parts which I multiplied by the distance of Saturn from the midheaven and divided by half the diurnal arc of Saturn's degree. And 8 degrees 8 minutes 59 seconds resulted and this was the proportional part of the difference which I added to the part of the radiation of the direct circle and 39 degrees 32 minutes 59 seconds resulted. These are the degrees of ascensions which were in the figure from Saturn to the ascendant's degree: and because they were less than 60, I knew that the sextile rays of Saturn in this figure fell beyond the ascendant's degree. I therefore subtracted these degrees from 60 for sextile radiation and 20 degrees 27 minutes 1 second remained: which I added to the ascensions of the ascendant's degree in the oblique circle which were 190 degrees 53 minutes: and 211 degrees 20 minutes resulted which I reduced to equal degrees in the oblique circle and found 22 degrees 54 minutes 52 seconds Libra: there were the sextile rays of Saturn in the proposed example. This method should be used for other angles. And let this suffice concerning radiations. Also, the five planets have terms in each sign. He has finished with the three essential dignities of the planets. In this part, the author determines the fourth essential dignity which the planets have in the signs. And he divides it into two parts: because in the first part he places the terms of the planets. In the second part he resolves a certain controversy which exists among some concerning triplicities and terms. The second part begins there. Some propose. The first part can be divided into two parts: so that first he begins to treat of the terms of the planets generally. Secondly, he places a table of these terms. The second part begins there because of the diversity of the same. First, he says that the planets, that is, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have terms arranged by different degrees. And the first term of Jupiter is from the beginning of Aries up to the end of the sixth degree of the same. And from the beginning of the seventh degree of the same Aries up to the end of the 12th is the term of Venus. And from the beginning of the 13th degree up to the end of the 20th is the term of Mercury. And from the beginning of the 21st up to the end of the 25th is the term of Mars. And from the beginning of the 26th up to the end of Aries is the term of Saturn. Afterwards he says: and these degrees are diverse: so that they do not proceed equally nor according to the order of the planets, it would be difficult to keep them in memory: therefore he placed them in a table as appears in the text. e iij

[Triplicities and Terms]
Some prefer triplicities to terms, which resolves the controversy among the wise regarding triplicities and terms. And it says that some prefer triplicities to terms, and some prefer terms to triplicities. This controversy is resolved by saying that the lords of triplicities are stronger as regards the nourishment of children, because in nativities they signify nourishment, and from them is taken the signification of whether the child will be vital or not. The lords of the terms, however, are stronger in direction, because when the ascending degree of any nativity is directed, it is directed to the terms of fortunes and misfortunes. And the lord of that term is called the divider or disposer of the order as long as the direction endures in that term; and if there is any planet or its rays there, it will be a participant. More will be said about this in the following, not preceding. It should be noted here concerning the terms that there was disagreement among the ancient wise men about the terms. And there were three famous opinions about the terms, one of which was of the Indians, another of the Egyptians, and the third of the Chaldeans. Ptolemy, in the 218th proposition of the first part of the Quadripartite, more approves the terms of the Egyptians and says that he found an old book of terms which, due to its age, was for the most part made. And that agreed with the terms of the Egyptians; and in that book, the sum of the degrees of the terms of each planet was as great as the number of its greater years which they give in nativities. For example: the greater years of Saturn are 57 years, of Jupiter 79, of Mars 66, of Venus 82, of Mercury 76. And all these collected make 360. If you wish to experience this, compute the degrees of all the terms of any planet, for example, Jupiter, and you will find the number of its years, namely 79. And so for the others. Daly, in the commentary on the 206th proposition of the first part of the Quadripartite, says: Those of Egypt were wise magicians who were from ancient times, for these were of great study and exercise in all sciences and wisdoms by which man could be helped. And we know this through the chronicles of the ancient wise men, according to what they spoke of them, and through what remains of their works for many thousands of years up to the present day. I therefore say what I saw from an experience that I found in a place called the eye of the sun, because in a short time I saw great miracles. These are the words of Paly. But he is silent about the experience. In the Centiloquium, in the commentary on that proposition, 'the face of this age,' he mentions an experience of a scorpion seal made in stone, as can be seen there; and whoever wishes to see it, let him see it there. And the faces of the signs. Here he determines concerning the dignity and the ultimate essential that a planet has in the signs, which is called faces. And it can be divided into three parts: because in the first part he places the division and ordering of the faces. In the second part he teaches how to find the faces by numbers. In the third part he places a table for them. The second part begins: 'When you have a degree in any sign.' The third is at the end where he places the table. He says that every sign is divided into three equal parts called three faces, and each face is of 10 degrees. And these faces begin from the beginning of Aries and proceed in the order of the signs of the planets, so that the first face is of Mars, that is, the first 10 degrees. The second face of Aries, that is, the next 10 degrees, are of the Sun, who succeeds Mars in the order of the spheres. The third is of Venus, who succeeds the Sun. And the first face of Taurus is of Mercury, who succeeds Venus. The second of the Moon, who succeeds Mercury. The third of Saturn. And the first of Gemini of Jupiter. And so according to this order up to the end of the signs. Afterwards he teaches how to find by numbers to which planet any face belongs. And he says, when you have a degree of any sign and wish to know whose planet's face it is in that degree, compute the number of signs from the beginning of Aries up to the beginning of the proposed sign; and multiply that number by three; and to the product add the complete faces of the proposed sign. For example, if 10 complete degrees have passed, add one. If 20 complete, add two. Then from the total number subtract 7 as many times as you can. What remains, count from Mars in the order of the planets. And where the number ends, the following planet is the lord of the sought face. For example, I have 15 degrees of Leo. I want to know whose face the 15th degree of Leo is. I know that from the beginning of Aries there are 4 complete signs. I will therefore multiply 4 by 3, and it will be 12. And I know that one complete face has passed in Leo; therefore I will add one, and it will be 13 complete faces from the beginning of Aries. I will subtract 7 from that, and 6 will remain. I will give the first unit to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus, the fourth to Mercury, the fifth to the Moon, the sixth to Saturn. Therefore, the following face, which was not complete, will be of Jupiter. Afterwards he places a table whose use is easy. For you will seek the name of that sign whose face's lord you seek, and you will find directly who is the lord of the first face, and who of the second, and who of the third. And because, with God's help, he has now finished concerning the dignities of the planets in the signs. In this part he determines concerning the strengths they have in these dignities. And it can be divided into two parts: because in the first part he shows how many strengths a planet has in each dignity. In the second part he compares these dignities to sensible things. There is a certain saying about this matter. The first part can be divided into two: because first he continues to speak. He says that, with God's help, he has completed concerning the dignities of the planets in the signs. Now he wants to show how many strengths each has in these dignities. Afterwards he says that the lord of the house has great strengths. The lord of exaltation has four. The lord of triplicity has three. The lord of the term has two. The lord of the face has one. Afterwards he repeats that controversy about the terms. And he places a comparison in the dignities of the planets, saying that some have made such a comparison of the dignities of the planets that a planet existing in its house is like a man existing in his own house and dominion. And a planet in its exaltation is like a man in his kingdom and glory, and it is clear in the text. From this text it can be noted that if any planet suffers great misfortune in its house or exaltation, this is very detestable. Just as it would be very detestable if a king were conquered in his own kingdom and in the strongest place of his kingdom. Therefore, if luminaries are eclipsed in their own houses or exaltations, this is a bad sign. He will speak of this. The figures of the signs follow these. The previous author determined concerning the dignities of the planets in the signs and concerning the strengths they have in these dignities. In this part he determines concerning the figures or forms of these signs, that is, he shows us which signs have human forms and which have forms of other animals. And it remains undivided. He says that some signs are called rational, those whose images are figured to the images of men. And these are Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, Libra, and half of Sagittarius.

[Sign Classifications and Terrestrial Divisions]
the last part of Sagittarius. And these are said to have beautiful voices. And their virtue is greater when they are in the East. And some of the signs are said to have voices, namely Gemini, Virgo, and Pisces. Some of them are said to be quadrupedal, namely Sagittarius, Leo, Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn. And some of these are domestic, meaning those that are figured according to the shapes of domestic animals. And these are Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn. And their virtue appears more when they are in the South. But the virtue of Virgo, Capricorn, and Aquarius appears more when they are in the North. And some of the signs are seen as vicious, ugly, and tortuous, namely Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And their virtue appears more in the West. Some, however, are sterile, namely Gemini, Leo, Virgo. And some are said to have few children, namely Aries, Taurus, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Aquarius. And some of these signs are very luxurious, namely Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn. And some are said to have many children, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And some of the signs are said to have a half-voice, namely those that have the voice of roaring and bellowing animals, such as Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorn, and the last part of Sagittarius. Some of the signs are said to be entirely voiceless, namely those that are figured according to the images of voiceless animals, such as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. Daly Abenragel briefly explains the forms of the signs, saying: Some signs are in the form of humans. Others in the form of beasts. Others in the form of wild beasts. Others in the form of reptiles. Those in human form are Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, Virgo. In the form of beasts are Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, and Sagittarius. In the form of wild beasts, i.e., predatory animals, is Leo. In the form of reptiles are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. Each of the signs has its own signification. Ptolemy determined the figures of the signs. In this, he shows us what the signs have from the limbs of humans, and from regions, and from planets. And it can be divided into two parts: because in the first part he does what has been said. In the second, he determines the pains of the planets in the signs. The second begins there: And the figure of the planet will signify pain. The first can be divided into 12 parts according to the 12 signs. It is clear what he says in the text, except that the names of the regions are not known to us. It is to be noted here that Ptolemy divides the entire habitable earth into four parts. And according to Ptolemy's division, one can imagine a line passing from East to West through the middle of the habitation, so that this line divides the southern part from the northern. And Daly says that this line is distant from the equator by 36 degrees. And according to this division, it is distant from the last habitation in the North by 30 degrees or so, so that the total width contains 66 degrees. And such is the distance from the equator to the arctic circle: indeed it is 66 degrees, 26 minutes, and 30 seconds. Therefore Daly says "or so." And he says that at the end of this line towards the West is the passage of Hercules. And this is where one passes into Spain, and there is a narrow sea there, so that one standing on one shore can see one standing on the other. There are three islands there, one of which is seen by those passing into Spain through the western land. And on it stands an idol holding keys in its hand to show that beyond that place there is no habitation. And on each of the other two islands stands an idol in the same manner. And in the eastern part, at the end of the aforesaid line, stand idols in the same manner, holding keys and showing that beyond that place there is no habitation towards the East. Daly says that Hercules placed these idols as a sign that he had acquired the whole world. The length of the aforesaid line, according to Daly, is 180 degrees. Having seen these things, in Ptolemy's opinion, imagine this line divided in the middle so that 90 degrees remain towards the East, and another 90 towards the West. And imagine a line passing through the poles of the world through the middle of the division of the aforesaid line, so that it passes through the middle of the habitable earth according to latitude. The first line, however, was said to pass through the middle of the habitable earth according to longitude. It is clear, therefore, that the two aforesaid lines, which divide the entire habitable earth into four parts, join at the intersection of the lines, which is a point in the middle of the habitable earth. With this division understood, it is easy to see Ptolemy's intention in the division of signs and lands. Thus Ptolemy says that these three signs, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, which form the first triplicity, belong to the fourth part of the habitable earth, which is between the North and the West. And Jupiter governs that fourth part because he is northern; and Mars has participation with him because he belongs to the western part. And the three signs of the second triplicity, namely Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, belong to the part that is between the South and the East; and Venus governs it because she is southern; and Saturn has participation with her because he belongs to the eastern part. And the three signs of the third triplicity, namely Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, belong to the part that is between the East and the North; and Saturn governs it because he belongs to the East and Jupiter has participation with him because he belongs to the North. And the three signs of the fourth triplicity, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, belong to the part that is between the South and the West; and Mars governs it because he belongs to the West; and Venus has participation with him. From the foregoing, anyone can conjecture to which sign any land belongs. For he will know by the longitude and latitude of the region to which quarter it belongs. For example: any land whose latitude is greater than 36 degrees and whose longitude from the West is less than 90 degrees is of the north-western quarter, and so on for the others in their own way. Therefore, having known the quarter in which your land is, you know that one sign out of the three signs of the triplicity of that quarter regards that land. And you will be able to know which of those three regards it by the customs and habits of the people living in it. For example: you know that the land of Christians is in the north-western part, so you know that Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius rule over it. And if I want to know over which part of it each of these signs rules, I look at the customs and conditions of the people with which great signs they agree. It is clear that the Romans are the most famous and noblest of this quarter, so it is fitting that the noblest sign among these three be attributed to them, and this is Leo, the house of the Sun. It is also clear that the Germans are irascible and furious men of the nature of Mars, so it is fitting that Aries, the house of Mars, be attributed to them. It is also clear that the Spanish are good soldiers, greatly exercised in arms, so it is fitting that Sagittarius, which is the sign of military affairs and wars, be attributed to them. And Ptolemy places this division in the text in the second part of the Quadripartitum. For he says thus: and the provinces agreeing with Aries are the land of the...

[Regions and Climates]
and the land of Salacia. I believe it should also be said of Scalavia and Germania. And those that concord with Leo are: Italy, Gaul, Apulia, and Sicily. And Daly says there: here are the ministers of Rome. And those that concord with Sagittarius are the lands of Turkey, Calatia, and Hispania. I do not care about the attribution of other signs to other lands, because neither their names nor the editions of men are known to me, nor would it be of any use to me to know them. If anyone knows them and does not wish to dwell on them, let him apply them in the manner described in the aforementioned three signs. Abraham Avenezra says that the first clime is of Capricorn and Aquarius, and its governor is Saturn. The second clime is of Sagittarius and Pisces, and its governor is Jupiter. The third clime is of Scorpio and Aries, and its governor is Mars. The fourth is of Leo, and its governor is the Sun. The fifth clime is of Taurus and Libra, and its governor is Venus. The sixth is of Gemini and Virgo, and its governor is Mercury. The seventh is of Cancer, and its governor is the Moon. Abraham Avenezra sets forth the conditions of those born under each sign, and his opinion is this: He who is born under the first face of Aries will be reddish and thin; his belly will be somewhat constricted, his flesh attenuated; he will have a mark above his left foot and on the elbow of his left hand; and his friends will be many, and he himself will hate evil. But he who is born under the second face will have blackness combined with the beauty of his face; his body will be temperate, quick to anger, concealing evil will in his mind; of high heart; his enemies will be many. He who is born under the third face will have a reddish and saffron color; he will be solitary. He who is born under the first face of Taurus will be short of stature; his eyes large; lips thick; and he will have a mark on his neck; and he is quick of heart; his friends many; he will delight in various manners. But he who is born under the second face will have a round face; a broad belly; beautiful eyes; and his mind will be willing and quick to act; and he will be hairy around the shoulders; and he will have a mark on his loins. And he who is born under the third face will be of beautiful color and beautiful face; and he will have a mark in his left eye; and he will be a laborious man; nor will he be fortunate in women. But he who is born at the end of this sign will lack natural testicles, or be an hermaphrodite. He who is born under the first face of Gemini will be of beautiful and decent body; and of eyes and hair; he will have a mark on his head or in his eyes. His sight will be keen; he will be least irascible; and he will be a worker and least fortunate with women. And he who is born under the second face will be short of stature and black, and a mark of blackness above his elbow; and his words beautiful and sweet. He who is born under the third face will have very small eyes; and he will be a suspicious and gentle man; and he will speak irrational words; and he will be a liar. He who is born under the first face of Cancer will be of decent body and hair; his eyebrows will be narrow, his nostrils long, and his shoulders broad; and he will have a mark on his right elbow or arm; and his soul good; his friends many; and he will be learned and ingenious. He who is born under the second face will have a reddish color, short stature; lacking a beard; and he will have a mark in his eyes. He who is born under the third face will be fat and short of stature; and he will have a multitude of hairs on his eyebrows. He who is born under the first face of Leo will be beautiful in body and face; and the color of his face will be reddish mixed with white; his eyes mixed; his chest straight; and his legs will suffer from disease in the upper part; he will be known among people; and simple, not mixed with the company of kings. He who is born under the second face will be beautiful; his chest will be broad; his testicles and legs slender; and he will be honored among his family and of high heart. But he who is born under the third face will be somewhat short of stature; and his color will be white mixed with rosy; his voice vehement; loving women; and he will have many friends and suffer many diseases. He who is born under the first face of Virgo will be of decent stature; his body will be erect and beautiful; and he will be learned and active; his hair curly; and he will love justice; his voice vehement; he will be sterile; his soul good; his face beautiful; and he will be a scribe and well-taught. But he who is born under the second face will be of beautiful appearance; his eyes small; his nose beautiful; and he will be disciplined and simple, of a willing heart. He will love to be praised. He who is born under the third face will be beautiful in appearance, susceptible to discipline; of true senses and simple and wise. He who is born under the first face of Libra will be beautiful of face; and ulcers will be on his head; and he will be a worker and simple and disciplined. He who is born under the second face will be of beautiful countenance and will have an impediment in his eyes; and he is of a willing heart. He who is born under the third face will be beautiful and will be known and honored among people. And he who is born at the end of this sign will be of no sex or of both sexes. He who is born under the first face of Scorpio will be little beautiful; and he will have a mark on his head; and his chest will be broad. And he will have a mark on his left foot or in his right hand; and he will be a man of good discipline, full of discretion, and quick in speech. He who is born under the second face, his head will be large; and he will be of moderately beautiful figure; and he will have a mark on his knee and back; and he will be a man of discipline, multiplying his words. He who is born under the third face will be short of stature; his eyes small; desirous of eating; loving women. But he who is born at the end of this sign will be of no sex or of both sexes. He who is born under the first face of Sagittarius will be of beautiful appearance; graceful in aspect; of straight stature; loving good; associating with kings and magnates. He who is born under the second face will have a decent body; his face saffron; his eyebrows compressed; and he will have a mark on his chest. He who is born under the third face will be tall; beautiful of face; his eyes like a cat's; his chest broad; and he will have a mark on his left leg. He who is born under the first face of Capricorn will have a decent body; a broad chest; and he will have a black mark on his elbow; he will be astute, disciplined, simple, and willing. He who is born under the second face will be beautiful; he will have long nostrils; his eyes beautiful; his will evil and irascible; he is a man of knowledge. He who is born under the third face will be beautiful of body; his face yellowish; and on his left arm there will be a mark or on his knee; quick to anger; despising evil or fighting for evil; loving women; a man of discipline, loving companions. But he who is born at the end of this sign will be an illegitimate child, and this sign is of little value in the nativities of women. But he who is born under the first face of Aquarius will be beautiful in body and face; and he will have a mark on his chest or left foot; and he will be a disciplined man and loving companions. He who is born under the second face will be tall; his face will be red; and he will have a mark on his back and under his elbow; and he will be in pain all his days. He who is born under the third face will be beautiful of body; short of stature; rosy of face; he will have a mark under his elbows; and he will be a lover of women. And he who is born at the end of this sign will be diversified in his figure and in all his works. But he who is born under the first face of Pisces, his body will be white; and his face likewise; his chest broad; his beard beautiful; his forehead clear; his eyes more black than white. And some member will be lacking to him; he will love to sleep; and he will be gluttonous and drunken; and he will have a mark under his elbow.

[Planets and Body Parts]
or in the foot. A native born under the second face will be of short stature, beautiful in appearance, with a black beard, hairy, and will walk with difficulty among the sons of men. A native born under the third face of Pisces will be of splendid appearance, his eyes beautiful, and he will be sickly. Indeed, the author first shows how the planets relate to the members of the human body. In this part, he shows us how the planets relate to the members of the human body in those signs. And this part can be divided into 12 parts according to the 12 signs, where the parts begin. The first part can be divided into two, because first it proposes, second it follows there: in Aries. He says first that if any planet signifies some infirmity or debility in the human body, it will have in each sign a proper member in which that infirmity will be. And it is fitting to treat the pains of the planets in the signs. And it begins from Aries, proceeding according to the succession of signs and planets. What the author says is clear in the text. For the evidence of one part, I give one example. I assume that in some nativity, Saturn signifies a debility of some member to the native, and Saturn is in Aries. I say that that debility or infirmity will be in the chest. And if Saturn is in Taurus, that infirmity will be in the belly, and so you understand for the other signs. I also assume that Mars in a nativity (you understand this for the revolution of the native's years) signifies a wound, and Mars is in Aries, the wound will be in the head. If in Taurus, the wound will be in the neck, and so for the other signs and planets you understand. Ptolemy wants the members in which diseases and impediments fall to be taken from the figure of the sky at the hour of nativity or revolution. For he says in the 74th proposition of the Centiloquium: when Mars is in the ascendant of any nativity, there will be a scar on the face or head of the native. For Daly says that the head is of the ascendant, and the neck is of the second house, the arms of the third house, and so according to the order of the houses, as was said about the signs. He will speak more extensively on this matter, God willing, in the chapter of the sixth house. Also, the author determines in this part about certain special properties of the planets that are in different degrees of the circle of signs, and there are six of them. For there are some masculine degrees and some feminine. And there are some lucid degrees and some dark. Also, there are some degrees that are called wells. And there are some degrees that are called azemena. And there are some degrees that are called augmenting fortune. And there are some degrees that are called consortes. And according to this, this part can be divided into six parts: because in the first part it enumerates masculine and feminine degrees. In the second part it enumerates lucid, dark, and smoky degrees. In the third part it enumerates degrees that are called wells. In the fourth part it enumerates degrees that are called azemena. In the fifth part it enumerates degrees that are called augmenting fortune and degrees of exaltation. In the sixth part it enumerates degrees that are called consortes. The first part begins at the beginning. The second begins there: and in each of these signs. The third begins there: and in the signs there are degrees. The fourth there: and there are in the signs certain degrees. The fifth there: and in the circle. The sixth there: and all two degrees. The first part can be divided into two parts: because in the first part it begins to enumerate masculine and feminine degrees literally. In the second part it provides a table of them. As it says, it is clear in the text. Afterwards it says that there are certain degrees in the circle that are called lucid and some dark, and some smoky, and some that are called empty. And it begins by enumerating them first. And then it provides a table of them, and it is clear. After that it says that there are in the circle certain degrees that are called wells. And it enumerates all of them in the text. And some books have a table made of them. Then it says that in the signs there are certain degrees that are called azemena. And it says that azemena is a certain bodily debility, such as blindness or deafness or something similar, or the loss of a member. In this regard, it is to be noted that Daly Abenragel says in the first chapter of the sixth house of his book on nativities: When the azemena part is in the partition of the ascendant and the Moon is conjoined with it, or the lord of the ascendant signifies azemena, it will be in that member of the native that falls in the partition of that sign. It is also to be noted that if the Sun in someone's nativity is in an azemena degree, there will be a debility in the right eye; if the Moon is, in the left. Afterwards it says that there are certain degrees in the circle that are called augmenting fortune, and it enumerates them in the text. In this regard, it is to be noted that Paly says in the commentary on the 229th proposition of the first part of the Quadripartitum: you should know that the degrees augmenting fortune are the degrees of exaltation of the Sun and fortunate planets, such as the 19th of Aries, the 3rd of Taurus, the 15th of Cancer, the 27th of Pisces. Similarly, there are those in which the terms of the fortunes are joined, such as the 12th of Sagittarius and the 13th of Pisces. And there are also degrees of the terms of the fortunes. And degrees in which there are fixed stars of the nature of fortunes. And conversely, those in which there are stars of the nature of misfortunes. And afterwards it says that all two degrees that are of the same longitude from the heads of the movable signs are of the same strength. And they are called consortes, such as the 20th degree of Capricorn and the 10th degree of Sagittarius. For these two degrees are equally distant from the head of Capricorn. And the 20th of Libra and the 10th of Virgo are equally distant from the head of Libra. And the 20th of Cancer and the 10th of Gemini are equally distant from the beginning of Cancer. And the 20th degree of Aries and the 10th of Pisces are equally distant from the beginning of Aries. Ptolemy says in the 229th proposition of the first part: Other astrologers have spoken much about degrees and divided them into lucid, slippery, and smoky degrees. And some of them are azemena, and some of them are wells. And they have spoken of many other things, as you will find in many astronomical books. And if they found this by experience, it is good to work by it. And perhaps if it happened to them that some planet or star was in a degree or its ray, and it made fortune, they concluded that the degree did this. And if indeed it is so, it is fitting that you move from one degree to another. And here let us put an end to our reasoning. It seems from the text that Ptolemy does not much approve of the degrees augmenting fortune. For he says: if it is so, it is fitting that you move from one degree to another. For degrees are called lucid or dark because of the fixed stars existing there. And Paly wants, according to what was previously alleged, that degrees are called augmenting fortune in which there are stars of the nature of fortunes. It is clear, however, that fixed stars change their places with respect to the zodiac of the ninth sphere. From that text of Ptolemy, it is possible.

[Judgments from the Ninth Sphere]
Judgments or indications should be made according to the ninth sphere, and not according to the eighth. For since he wishes to change these degrees, it is consequent that the degrees according to which judgments ought to be made do not change. Albumazar in his introduction sets forth these degrees, namely, masculine and feminine, lucid and shadowy, etc. And he says there that if a planet in a nativity or interrogation of a male is in a masculine degree, or in a nativity of a female or interrogation in a feminine degree, its signification will be stronger. Concerning lucid, shadowy, and famous degrees, he says that if a planet falls in a lucid degree, its signification will be stronger in the signification of honors and it signifies beauty. And if it falls in a shadowy degree, it signifies hardness and slowness and a horrible and dark and evil thing. And when it falls in a dusky, or shadowy, or smoky degree, or in an empty degree, it signifies something slightly horrible. And if a planet falls in a degree of a well, its beauty and appearance will depart, and it will be weakened in its signification. For when fortunes fall into them, they are weakened in their signification. But when malefics fall into them, their signification is weakened. And perhaps fortune will signify an accidental event because of their weakness over evil. Concerning degrees that increase fortune, he says the ancients thought that there would be degrees in the circle that increase fortune. And they said that when planets are not in places signifying the native's fortune, and the Moon or Part of Fortune is in these degrees, or these degrees themselves are ascending, they increase the native's fortune. And if the planets signify a fall for him, these degrees move him to exaltation by some quantity with a certain motion. Concerning degrees of sublimity, he says: Some have said that when the Ascendant is one of these degrees, or the Sun is in a diurnal nativity, or the Moon in a nocturnal nativity in some of them, and it is in the best place in the figure. And when with this the planets of the root of the nativity signify fortune, it will lead the native to sublimity and a seat of nobility, and he will rule lands and cities, and possess much wealth. And because, with God's help, the author first determined concerning the essential being of the circle of signs, here he determines concerning its accidental being. And it is divided into two parts: first, it continues the things said; second, it follows there: for the circle of signs. And that is divided into two parts: first, it determines concerning the accidental division of the circle of signs. Second, it determines concerning the properties and significations consequent to that division; and it begins there: the fourth part which is from the Ascendant. And that is divided into two parts: first, it sets forth the properties and significations of the quarters. Second, it sets forth the significations of the individual houses; and that begins there: and one of the houses. First, he says after completing the essential being of the circle of signs, now he wishes to treat of its accidental being. Afterwards he says that the circle figures at every hour such a figure which is divided into four parts, which the circle of the horizon and the circle of the meridian divide. And each of these quarters is divided into three equal parts according to the division of the ascending sign in the direct circle. And in this way the whole circle is divided into 12 parts which are called towers or houses, whose explanation is in the canons of the tables. Two great circles passing through the poles of the world are to be understood: one is the meridian circle; and the other is the circle passing through the point of the zodiac which is in contact with the eastern horizon, and through the opposite point, namely, which is in contact with the western horizon, intersecting the meridian circle above the poles of the world. These two circles divide the whole heaven into four parts which are sometimes equal to each other, sometimes unequal; but for the most part they are unequal. For if the beginning of Aries or the beginning of Libra is in the Ascendant, these quarters are equal. In all other dispositions, however, they are unequal. Afterwards, let the portion of the equinoctial circle intercepted between the meridian circle and the circle passing through the beginning of the Ascendant be understood to be divided into three equal parts. Similarly, let the other portion of the equinoctial circle which is from the Ascendant to the lower part of the meridian circle, namely, to the angle of the earth, be understood to be divided into three equal parts. Then let great circles passing through the aforesaid divisions and through the poles of the world be imagined. Then the portion of the zodiac intercepted between any two of the first circles is one house. This is Ptolemy's position; and this is commonly held. There is also another imagination concerning the houses which Abraham Avenezre holds. And he imagines circles passing through the divisions of the equinoctial and through the intersection of the meridian circle and the horizon in the northern part. This method is not commonly held; therefore, I do not care to explain it much. To find the beginnings of the 12 houses of the astrolabe is not difficult; indeed, it is easy, whose doctrine to interpose here would be long and superfluous, since it has been sufficiently set forth in the canons of the astrolabe. But whoever wishes to equalize the houses by tables will find complete doctrine in the canons of the tables of the primum mobile. Then the author says the beginning of this division is the Ascendant, whose beginning is at the point of the hemisphere on the eastern side. Then follows the second house; then the third; and so on to the twelfth. The fourth and significations of the circle of signs consequent to its accidental division. And he says that the fourth part of the circle which is from the Ascendant to the Midheaven, namely, the 12th, 11th, and 10th houses, is called the eastern masculine approaching. And it signifies the beginning of life and is called puerile sanguine. And the other fourth is from the Midheaven to the degree of the west, namely, the 9th, 8th, and 7th houses, is called the southern feminine receding from us; and it signifies the middle age which is called the perfection of youth; and it is called aestival and choleric. The third fourth which is from the degree of the west to the angle of the earth, namely, the 6th, 5th, and 4th houses, is western masculine approaching us; and it signifies the end of life; and it is called autumnal melancholic; and it is of middle age. The fourth part which is from the angle of the earth to the Ascendant, namely, the third, second, and first houses, is northern feminine receding from us; and it signifies what happens to a man after his death as regards the memory of men, namely, whether good or evil is said of him. And this part is called senile phlegmatic defective and hibernal. And this is a correct comparison which the author sets forth here, just as that which he set forth in the essential division of the circle, except that he adds that this signifies the beginning and middle and end of life and what happens to a man after his death. Afterwards he says that the whole half which is from the Midheaven going through the Ascendant to the fourth house is called the ascending half. And the other half which is from the fourth house going through the degree of the west to the Midheaven is called ascending. And the whole half which is

[Houses and their significations]
that which is above the earth is called the right, and that which is below the earth is called the left. Then it says that the first house, 7, 4, 2, 7, and 10 are called angles. And 2, 5, 8, and 11 are called succedents to the angles. But 3, 6, 9, and 12 are called cadent from the angles. Then it adds a notable point: it says that when a planet is in an angle or in a succedent, it is said to be effective; and if it is in the cadent houses, it is said to be ineffective. Each of these houses, the author says, has its own proper significations. The 12 houses, and all of this can be divided into four parts: in the first part, it sets out the significations of the 12 houses as they pertain to human existence. In the second part, it sets out the significations of the houses as they pertain to colors. In the third part, it sets out certain rules that can be called aphorisms. In the fourth part, it teaches how to choose significators. The first part begins at the beginning. The second begins there: they signify: and the 12 houses' colors. The third there: and it is said in the signification of the houses. The fourth there: and when you wish to know the planet ruling the matter. The first part can be divided into twelve parts according to the significations of the 12 houses, and where they begin will be clear. First, it says that each house signifies something about human existence. For the first house, which begins from the eastern horizon and is called the ascendant, signifies the bodies of men and life: the beginnings of all works in interrogations, speeches, rumors, and other such things. And it signifies the thought of the querent, that is, what the querent has in mind, and it signifies the beginning of life. And the lord of the first triplicity of the first house, the first, signifies life and the nature of the native or querent, and his delights and desires, what he loves or hates: and what good or evil befalls him at the beginning of life. And the second lord of the triplicity of this house signifies the life and body and strength or health of the native, and the middle of life. The third lord of the triplicity signifies the same as the second, and signifies by itself the end of life. From this letter, it can be gathered that if the first lord of the triplicity of this house is stronger than the other two, the first part of life will be better, and so you should understand for the other two. Concerning this house, certain things are to be noted. First, it is to be noted concerning the intention of the querent, which Ptolemy says in the 94th proposition of the Centiloquium: The place of the stronger significator in the ascendant is that which is in the mind of the querent. Therefore, when you wish to know the intention of the querent, see which planet has more strength in the ascendant at that hour when he comes to you to ask, and see in which house out of the 12 houses that planet is. And you should speak according to the significations of that house in which it is. For example, I assume the ascendant is Leo, and the Sun has more strength in the degree of the ascendant, and I assume that the Sun is in the 2nd house. I say that his intention is to ask about his substance or about profit or about something similar. And if the Sun had been in the third house, I would have said that he wanted to ask something about the existence of a brother or brothers, and so on for the other houses in their own way. And if, when he came to you, he held something in his hand or concealed it in some other way, and if you wish to know the substance and nature of that thing, look at the stronger planet in the ascendant. If it aspects the ascendant, that thing will be of the substance of the ascendant sign. If it does not aspect the ascendant, its substance will be of the sign in which the planet is. If it is an earthy sign, it will be of the nature of earth or some other thing born from the earth. If it is a watery sign, it will be some other thing of the nature of water, or born from water. If it is airy, it will be some other thing of the nature of air. If it is a fiery sign, it will be some other thing that operates by fire. And if you wish to know the color of the thing, look at the lord of the hour and judge its color. Of the colors of the planets, it will be said later when we speak of the natures of the planets, God willing. And if you wish to know whether the thing is new or old, look at the Moon: if it is above the earth, it will be new; if it is below the earth, it will be old. And if you wish to know whether it is long or short, look at the lord of the term of the degree of the angle of the earth, and if it is in the apogee of its circle, the thing will be long. If it is in the opposite of the apogee, it will be short. If in the middle longitudes, it will be moderate between long and short. This is the opinion of Ptolemy in the 90th proposition of the Centiloquium. When the significator aspects the ascendant, etc. Haly Abenragel says that if someone asks you about his life, whether it will be long or short: look at the lord of the ascendant and the Moon. If they are safe from misfortunes, it signifies a long life. And if they are combust or unfortunate, it signifies a short life. It is to be noted concerning nourishment, that is, whether a child will live or not. Haly Abenragel says that when the lords of the triplicity of the luminary of the time (meaning the lords of the triplicity of the sign in which the Sun is, if it is a diurnal nativity, or of the Moon in a nocturnal nativity) are in the ascendant, or in the 10th house, or 11th, or 5th, it is a signification of good and easy nourishment. And if they are in the seventh, it signifies bad nourishment: and anxious and laborious. When the degree of the ascendant and the luminary of the time are afflicted, it signifies that he will not be nourished unless the lords of the triplicity are safe and firm in the angles. When the Moon is unfortunate in the ascendant, it does not signify nourishment. When the Moon is in the 4th house, corporally conjoined with an unfortunate planet, or aspects an unfortunate planet from the 4th or by opposition, it signifies that he will not be nourished and his mother is in danger: or perhaps she will die. Aben Ezra says: If the lord of the ascendant is combust, the native will not live for the space of 8 days. A nativity was brought to me of a child whose ascendant was Virgo, and Mercury was in Pisces in its detriment, retrograde and combust. And I believed this saying and said that the child would not live for eight days, and he died on the sixth day. Haly Abenragel says: the conjunction of planets does not signify humanity. He means that the conjunction of several planets in the ascendant does not signify nourishment. And he gives a notable example there. He says: the king of our city called me, and one of the women gave birth to a son, and the ascendant was Libra, 8 degrees of Mercury's term: and Jupiter, Venus, Mars, and Mercury were in it, and a society of astrologers gathered there, and each of them gave his opinion: and I was silent. The king said to me: what do you have that you do not speak? To whom I replied: give me a term of three days: because if your son passes the third day, it will be a great miracle concerning him. And when the native had completed 24 hours, he began to speak: and he spoke and made a sign with his hand, and the king was very frightened by it. And he said it was possible that he would say some prophecy: or some miracle. And the king went to the native: and we with him to hear what he would say. And the infant said: I am born unfortunate: and I am born to judge the loss of the kingdom and the destruction of the German people. Then the native immediately fell and died. Concerning those who die before they receive food, Ptolemy says in the Quadripartitum: generally I say that when any luminary is in any of the angles, and there is also some unfortunate planet having participation with it in longitude, which is degree by degree with it: or aspects it in a figure of two equals. And it does not have a fortunate planet participating with it in figure. And the disposer of the luminaries of the place is found in the places of the unfortunate planets, that native will not receive food and will die at the hour he is born.

[Dragon's Tail in Ascendant]
Abrabam says that if the Dragon's Tail is in the ascendant of a nativity, that native will be blind, and the distance from the ascendant in degrees will be the years. For example, if it is in the 10th degree from the ascendant, he will be blind in the 10th year. Elections of this kind are the beginnings of things, such as beginning to build or to do something. Hyspalensis says in the elections of the first house: If you know someone's nativity, be careful in their election not to place a sign in the ascendant in which there was an infortune in their nativity. But if you do not know the nativity, choose according to the nature of the thing for which the election is made. For example, if the election is for beginning to write a book, Mercury should be fortified. If for going to war, Mars should be fortified. If for building, a fixed sign should be placed in the ascendant. The same Hyspalensis says, when wishing to choose a time for bloodletting, make sure that the Moon is in a trine or sextile aspect to Mars. And be careful that it is not conjunct with him bodily, or in a square or opposition to him. And make sure that the Moon is in a sign of diminishing humor. The second house. The author here sets forth the significations of the second house. And he says that the second house signifies substance and sustenance and helpers and ministers, and it signifies the end of youth. And Anduzgar said, see which of the three lords of the triplicity of the house of substance is stronger in itself, that is, in the place where it is in the figure, and it will signify substance. If it is in the tenth house, he will have substance from a king. And if it is in the house of trust, that is, in the eleventh, it will be better. Another letter says if it is in the house of faith, it will be more. I believe that the first letter is true. For the house of trust is the house of the king's substance. And the first lord of the triplicity gives substance at the beginning of life; if he is fortunate, the native will be rich at the beginning of life. The second gives substance in the middle of life; if he is fortunate, the native will be rich in the middle of life. The third gives substance at the end of life; if he is fortunate, the native will be rich at the end of life. And understand similarly about their misfortunes, that is, if any of them is unfortunate, the native will lose substance in that part of life which is attributed to him. Hyspalensis says in the canons of this house, consider whether the lord of the second house is in the ascendant or gives its strength to the lord of the ascendant and is not in a fallen house. If so, he will have gain without labor. And if the opposite is true, it will be the reverse. And if Jupiter is angular in the nativity, or is in his honor, or has strength in the ascendant, or aspects the Part of Fortune, or is the lord of the house of the Sun in a day nativity, or the lord of the house of the Moon in a night nativity, or is the lord of the hour, the native will not lack wealth in his life, because this, that is, Jupiter, is the lord of substance. But if the lord of the ascendant aspects the lord of substance or its house or the Part of Fortune with an aspect of enmity, he will destroy substance with his own hand. If the lord of the ascendant is in the second house unfortunate, he will give his substance by his own will. But if there is an unfortunate planet there who is not the lord of the ascendant, he will take from him by force or theft. If Capricorn is the ascendant, the native will be greedy and avaricious, because the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the second are the same, namely Saturn. Ptolemy says in the canons of this house, concerning matters pertaining to gains of substance, how they will be, it is fitting for us to inquire only from the Part of Fortune, which we always know by that which is between the Sun and the Moon, projected from the ascendant in day nativities and in night nativities. According to which it should be noted that the Part of Fortune according to Ptolemy is projected in this way: subtract the true place of the Sun from the true place of the Moon, and what remains is counted from the degree of the ascendant, and where the number ends, there is the Part of Fortune. Ptolemy commands to always do this, whether it is by day or by night. More will be said about this, God willing, in the exposition of the fifth difference, for there it has its place. Afterwards, Ptolemy says the judgment of this is in this manner. I mean, take the planets governing the sign. Daly says there that the rule by which we know the native's wealth is to take the planets governing the place of the Part of Fortune and prefer the one who has more dignities there. Then Ptolemy says, and when the governors of the Part of Fortune are strong and powerful, the native will have great wealth, especially if the two luminaries testify there with a concordant testimony, that is, a trine or sextile aspect. Ptolemy, know that Saturn signifies that the native's wealth will be from women, or by labor of the earth, or by the sea. And Jupiter signifies that wealth will be from stewardship or from gifts of good and religious people. And Mars signifies that wealth will be from producing soldiers or governing men of arms. And Venus signifies that wealth will be from gifts of friends and women. And Mercury signifies that wealth will be from sciences and merchandise. Daly Abenragel says that in this we must first look at the fixed stars which are of the first magnitude. And if we find any of them in the degree of the ascendant, or in the degree of the tenth house, or in the degree of the seventh, or in the degree of the fourth, or in the degree of the Sun if the nativity is diurnal, or in the degree of the Moon if the nativity is nocturnal. And the best of all these places is the degree of the ascendant, then the degree of the tenth house, then the degree of the seventh, then the fourth. And if any of the aforesaid stars are in two places, or in three, or more, and the native is of royal lineage, he will be a high king. And if he is not of royal lineage, he will have power and command similar to the power and command of a king, and he will attain great nobility and high dominion, and he will rule over cities and nations. And know that the fixed stars, that is, of the first honor, elevate a man to a high degree and great dignity and change him from the lowest to the highest. Ptolemy says the same in the 29th proposition of the Centiloquium: fixed stars give gifts exceeding measure, but often end in evil. Daly says in the commentary on the same proposition, when these stars alone preside, that is, without the testimony of fortunate planets, their death will be a most evil death. Daly Abenragel says, when the Part of Fortune is cadent, that is, in a bad place, or is under the rays of the Sun, or in the rays of an infortune, and its lord is in a peregrine place, that is, in a place where it has no dignity, and the lord of the second house does not aspect the ascendant, the native will be laborious and poor and will live a narrow and miserable life. Neither the Sun nor Mars nor Saturn is good in the second house in any nativity, nor will the native have good from it, because the Sun destroys planets and takes away their light, and Mars is the significator of impediments, labors, and lack of substance. Saturn signifies poverty and indigence, and this is especially true if the lord of the house of substance is combust with the damnation of the Part of Fortune. Abrabam says, if you wish to know which of those born will be poor or rich, look at the lord of the second house. If he is fortunate, he will be rich; if combust or retrograde or in his fall, he will be poor, as has been said in nativities, so understand in questions. Concerning elections made in this house, Hyspalensis says, if you wish to buy something for the sake of gain, make sure that the Moon is in a trine or sextile aspect to the Sun, and be careful that it is not under the light in the third.

[Sun and Ascendant Lord]
Sun: It is better that the lord of the ascendant gives strength to the planet existing in the tenth or eleventh house, so that the recipient is not retrograde. If Jupiter is in the ascendant, fourteenth, eleventh, or second house, it is good. Also, look for the Part of Fortune to be in a good place, and it is better that the lord of the Part or the Moon or the Sun aspects it. The third house here sets forth the significations of the third house, and says that the third house signifies brothers and sisters, relatives and kin, and loved ones; and it signifies faith and religion, messages and embassies, changes, short journeys. And it signifies the state of life before death. And Anduzgazar says that the first lord of the triplicity of this third house signifies older brothers. The second, middle brothers. The third, younger brothers; and their status and dignity are judged according to the status of these lords. Daly Abenragel says that when the Sun is the lord of the third house from the ascendant and burns the lord of the second house or the Part of Substance, it signifies that the native will lose substance on account of brothers, and will pay for them impositions, losses, and many damages. When the lord of the third house and the Part of Brothers or Jupiter are in common signs or signs of many children, and the Fortunes aspect them with friendly aspect and with reception, it signifies that the native is the firstborn among his brothers, and that he will have powerful and good brothers. If the lord of the house of brothers is combust, or the Part of Brothers is combust, or if the Sun is in the house of brothers, or opposite Jupiter; these are significations of few brothers, and that they will be destroyed and scattered. When the lord of the house of brothers is unfortunate above the earth, it signifies that harm and occasion will come to the brothers who were before him. And if this misfortune occurs while he is below the earth, it is bad; and this harm will come to the brothers who will be after him. And in this way you will speak in good and fortune when he is fortunate in good and strong places. If the lord of the house of brothers is in the ascendant, it signifies that the native is the firstborn, or will be alone without ever having brothers or sisters; or when there is no planet between the ascendant and the midheaven, it similarly signifies that the native is the firstborn. And if any brothers are born after him, they will be lost. And if any of them remain, he will always be older and better. When in any revolution of the native's years, the lord of the third house is in the tenth from the ascendant of the nativity, one of his brothers will die in that year. Similarly, if the lord of the third radical house of the nativity is in the tenth house of the revolution; this is because the tenth house from the ascendant is the eighth from the third house. If someone asks you about the state of his brother, look at the third sign from the ascendant, which is the house of brothers, and its lord of the triplicity and the lord of that house, and what aspects it from fortunes or misfortunes, and in what place it is: for if you find the lord of the third house in the sixth house, or applying to the lord of the sixth house, or the lord of the sixth in the third, you will say that his brother is sick. And if you find him in the fifth or second, you will say that his brother is not in his place, because he has gone out of his place. And if you find the lord of the third house unfortunate, or in the twelfth, you will say that his brother is in anxiety or in sickness. And if you find the lord of the third with Mars, both conjoined and entering combustion under the Sun's rays, you will say that he will not escape from sickness. And if both are combust, indicate death in all ways. And in this way you will look if you are asked about things pertaining to other houses, such as a father or son or wife. Hyspalensis says, wanting to begin a journey, make sure that a fortunate planet aspects the third house or its lord, so that there is no malefic there or its square aspect or opposition. If the Moon is in the third house, it is good. Cancer, Leo, and Capricorn are bad for a short journey. The Moon in the ascendant or in the fourth house is bad in every election. Beware that the Moon is not in the via combusta, which is from the 19th degree of Libra to the third of Scorpio. Also beware that the Moon is not near the head or tail of the Dragon within 12 degrees. The fourth house here sets forth the significations of the fourth house. And it says that the fourth house signifies fathers and inheritances and the ends of things; and it signifies treasures and all hidden and concealed things; and it signifies the end of life. And Anduzgazar says that the first lord of the triplicity of the fourth house signifies fathers. The second signifies cities and lands. The third signifies the end of things and prisons. Daly Abenragel says: Look at the state of the father and the lords of the triplicity of the fourth house. If the first lord of the triplicity of the fourth house is in its house or in its exaltation, or in its hayz, received by the Sun or Jupiter, and is in a high place of the midheaven or in the fifth house, it signifies a good state of the father, nobility, high position, riches, power, and a long life and good fortune, and this if the sign in which this planet was is masculine: however, if the sign itself is feminine, it signifies to the mother what we have said; and especially if the planet is feminine. What hayz is, he will explain later, God willing. And if the second lord of the triplicity of the fourth house is strong, the father will have lands and will cultivate them and will work in them and will have good utility or profit from this part. And if these planets are in a diverse or contrary state, judge them. And if the third lord of the triplicity of the fourth house is strong and fortunate as we have said, the father will be a man who extracts treasures and cuts vines, and prepares precious stones. And if he is in a state diverse from what we have said, he will be a stone cutter or will work in bad and stinking materials. If the Sun in diurnal nativities or Saturn in nocturnal ones. And the Part of the Father similarly aspects the ascendant or its lord from a square or opposition, it signifies that the native's father will abhor and hate him and will try to kill him. And if the Moon and the Part of the Mother aspect the ascendant or its lord, that abhorrence and malevolence towards the son will be from the mother. Hermes said that the fourth house is the pit of the planets because it is at the bottom of the celestial circle and in infirmity; and it is in a trine aspect to the twelfth house, which is the house of darkness, labors, anxieties, and prisons; and it is the joy of the greater infortune; and it is in a sextile aspect to the sixth house, which is the dark house of sickness and damages, the joy of the lesser infortune. When any planet is in the fourth house and in its fall, it is like a man suffocated in solitude until he comes out of it. Daly Abenragel says that when the Part of Fortune is unfortunate in a masculine sign, judge that the father will die before the mother. If in a feminine sign, the mother will die before the father. The Part of the Father is taken from the Sun to Saturn by day, and from the Moon to Saturn by night.

[Part of Mother and Father]
The Part of the Mother is taken in the day from Venus to the Moon, and at night the opposite, and it is projected from the Ascendant. If the lord of the Part of the Father is above the earth, and the lord of the Part of the Mother is below the earth, judge that the mother will die before the father. And if the contrary is true, judge the contrary. Daly Abenragel says that Albezen, son of Albezib, said: One day, when I was with Abolaben, and Meraefo was with him, a certain old man came to me and gave me a chart, in which was written the figure of a nativity. And he told me to look at that figure. And I asked him whose figure or nativity it was, and he replied that it was of a certain son of his. And while I was looking at it and thinking about it, Abolaben took it from my hand and looked at it for a while and said: "The first thing we see in this nativity is that this native is born of adultery, because he is not the son of him who says he is his son." I said, "How do you know this?" And he replied, "This old man says that this nativity is of his son, and the father of the native, whose nativity this is, died four years ago, and he died in the same year that the native was born." And I asked how he knew this. And he said: "I looked at the degree of the father and found it opposite the mother, and there was not more than one degree between them. And I found the Part of the Father in the second house from the Ascendant, which is the eighth from the fourth, and there was one degree between the Part and Saturn, for which reason I judged that the father of this native died in the year he was born. And this old man says that he is his son, therefore the native is illegitimate." And then the old man said: "I am not the father of this native, but he is the son of my son, and my son, his father, died in the same year of this nativity, as this good man said."

[The Fifth House]
The Fifth House. Here the author sets forth the significations of the fifth house. He says that this house signifies sons, both male and female. And it signifies affections and envoys or messengers and gifts. And what will happen after death, whether praise or blame. And Anduzga said that the first lord of the triplicity of the house of children signifies children and their life. The second signifies affections. The third signifies envoys or messengers. Ptolemy says, in the reasons for this house, that we should look at the planets existing in the place of the zenith of our heads, and at the place that follows it, which is the place of fortune, and at the place participating with them in the figure. Daly says in the commentary that the place which is the zenith of our heads is the tenth house. And the place that follows is the eleventh house, which is the house of fortune. And the rule by which we will know about children is taken from the planets existing in these places, or existing in places participating with them, such as the Ascendant and the seventh house, both of which participate with the tenth and eleventh. And if we find a planet in these places, we will look if we find any in the fourth or fifth house, and we will take the signification from there. Ptolemy says that we will judge the Moon, Venus, and Jupiter in giving children. The Sun, Mars, and Saturn in taking away, and we will give Mercury participation with whichever of these it participates with in the figure. Daly says in the commentary: If any of the fortunate planets are in the aforesaid places, it signifies that he will have children. If any of the unfortunate planets, he will have no children, and if he has any, they will be weak and few. And if Mercury has participation with the fortunate planets, it will be fortunate; if with the unfortunate, it will be unfortunate. Ptolemy says, and the opposition of the 144th part of the fourth part, you will be able to know the particular matters of children by considering, if you look well, in each of them, at the planet giving children, so that you place it in the place of the Ascendant, and you will know the other particulars of children generally, as by a nativity. Daly says in the commentary: What Ptolemy wants to relate in this place is what happened in my nativity. I looked and found Jupiter in the tenth house and in the 28th degree of Capricorn, aspecting itself with the Moon and Saturn, and this signified that I would have children and that they would die, because Saturn was with Jupiter in the tenth house. And because Jupiter was in a feminine sign, and the Moon likewise, it signified that there would be more than one, and that there would be more females. And because Jupiter was oriental, it signified that I would have a male. And so I had three children: one male and two females, and all died. The ascending degree of the male's nativity was around the degree of Saturn in my nativity, and because of this he died quickly. And the ascending degree of one female was in Pisces in the sextile of Jupiter in my nativity and in the trine of my Moon's nativity; and the Sun was hyleg in the sign of Capricorn. And the ascending degree of the other female was in Capricorn. And this is wonderful, for which reason it can be known that nativities always agree with each other. Hispalensis says, wishing to choose the hour for generating a male child: let Jupiter be in any angle, or let the Sun be oriental, and let the lord be male, and it is better that the ascending sign be masculine and also its lord. And if the Moon is fortunate by Jupiter, it will be better. For a female, take feminine signs and feminine planets, and let Jupiter be occidental. Daly Abenragel says: When there is any fortune in the fifth house, and the lord of the fifth house is free from misfortunes, and aspects the Midheaven, the native will have many children, and they will live and prosper. And if the contrary is true, it signifies the contrary. Look in all nativities: if you find the luminaries unfortunate, having no aspect, the native will have few children. In knowing the time when children will be had, look at the planet that has more dignities in the house of children. If you find it in the oriental part, he will have children in his youth. If you find it in the Midheaven, he will have them in the middle of his age. And if in the seventh, he will have them at the beginning of old age. If in the fourth, he will have them around the end of his life. Likewise, when the year comes to the sign in which Jupiter or Venus was in the radix of the nativity, he will have a child in that year. Daly Abenragel says: If you are asked about a woman, whether she is pregnant or not, look if you find the lord of the Ascendant and the Moon in the house of children; or if you find the lord of the house of children in the Ascendant, free from misfortunes, say that that woman is pregnant. And if the lord of the Ascendant or the lord of the house of children has given its strength to a planet existing in an angle. And likewise, if the lord of the Ascendant has been received by the one receiving it, say that she is pregnant. And if the lord of the Ascendant has given its strength to a planet falling from an angle, it signifies that she is not pregnant.

[The Sixth House]
The Sixth House. Here are set forth the significations of the sixth house. It says that the sixth house signifies infirmities and servants, and it signifies the end of life and what will happen in old age. Anduzga said that the first lord of the triplicity of this house signifies infirmities and their increase or deterioration. The second signifies household slaves and servants. Note the difference between a household slave and a servant. For a household slave is the same as a domestic, and is called a purchased servant. A servant is one who is of servile condition. As Adam said in verse:

[Sixth House and Critical Days]
The third triplicity of the sixth house signifies what good or evil may befall one from servants and the utility and work of animals. And with this, it is a significator of beasts and cattle and all quadrupeds that are not ridden. It signifies their multitude or scarcity and their strength, and how many will be in his hand and how many will depart from his hands. It also signifies prisons and detentions. Ptolemy says in the 60th proposition of Centiloquium: "Albobara, truly and certainly, are the hours in which the changes of diseases are declared for good or for evil, or quickly. And the places of the Moon in angles are excluded from the direct circle. The alterations that predict these and indicate them are the true places of the Moon in the angles of the almuten. Those that predict these are the places of the Moon in the angles of the 16th side. And if 15 days have passed since the beginning of the illness, and it is equal, and nothing external has happened to disturb the sick person, then if we find a fortune, whether from fixed stars or wandering stars, it will signify a prosperous alteration. But if it is an adverse alteration in fortune, unless the misfortune itself is contrary to the illness and in its hayz. The Moon in these angles signifies acute diseases, and the Sun signifies chronic diseases. And similarly, every planet according to its own customs. Haly in his commentary on the same says that Ptolemy taught us the number of critical days and what they are and who determines good or evil and alterations in order. The utility in this is greater for physicians than for astrologers, and this is because many philosophers agree on the determinations, saying that there are alterations and many things between the nature of the sick and acute diseases on the fourth day and the seventh day and the 14th day and the 21st day, and these increase according to what is accepted by mere hearing and doctrine without science. And they do not reason in this except by what has passed from their experiments. But Ptolemy said and revealed how it happens. And according to Ptolemy, it is that nature is overcome by the disease at its beginning and prevents it from performing its operations according to equality, nor does it resist the disease at the hour it conquers, but waits for the Moon to be in the first place in which it was at the beginning of the disease, because then the strength of those who move in it will not be as it was at the beginning of the disease. Then it is incited to resist it, just as a prudent actor does not act with a foolish accused when he wants to resist him, unless his strength has been weakened and in that place where he lacks helpers. And it excites that nature in the fourth sign from the sign in which the illness began, and the Moon being in that which is contrary to its nature from every fourth sign, and similarly the seventh, because these places, that is, the fourth aspect and the opposition, signify enmities and contrarieties. And the time that is between the beginning of the disease and the entry of the Moon into the degree of the square in which it was at the beginning of the disease, through the ascensions of the signs in the direct circle and the projections of the rays, is seven days. And in the same way, what is between the Moon at the beginning of the disease and itself in opposition is 14 days. And what is between the beginning of the disease and the second aspect which is contrary to the beginning of the disease is 21 days. And according to this method, the method of the other days proceeds. And these points will be the angles of the square which the line of the direct circle includes. And to those points, other points are indicative, and it is that the Moon reaches the point that cuts off each arc whose side subtends one of the sides of the square through the middle. And in these arcs are the sides of the figure having eight angles. And all these points are contrary to the points in which the disease began by nature. Therefore, the astrologer should observe whether in these points, both from fixed stars and wandering stars, whether they are fortunes or misfortunes. And if it is a fortune, it indicates that it signifies the victory of nature over cholera. Misfortunes, however, signify that cholera will overcome nature, unless the misfortune is contrary to the disease and strong in its hayz. For it will not make the Moon fortunate when it is in its hayz, but it will remove the disease by being contrary to it, and by the misfortune being contrary to the disease, as if it were cold and the disease hot, or if it were hot and the disease cold, and with these similar things in species of diversities. And he says that the Sun in chronic diseases is like the Moon in acute diseases, whose greater time will be the orb of the Moon, and in chronic diseases, the orb of the Sun. Ptolemy also subtly hints to us when he says that every star is according to its customs. Indeed, he taught us that whatever is immoderate in us and is in customs that we do not have, he calls a disease. And he said this is just, unless something external happens that disturbs the order of determination. And those who expounded the book of Hippocrates' Aphorisms spoke of the thing that destroys determination, and therefore it is not necessary for us to recite it in this book. The whole intention of Ptolemy and Haly stands in this, that the reason why the 4th, 7th, 14th, and 21st days are critical days is that the Moon frequently comes to the fourth aspect of the place in which it was at the beginning of the disease on the seventh day, and the Moon frequently comes to the opposite place on the 14th day, and frequently comes to the second fourth aspect on the 21st day. Therefore, Haly says that when the astrologer wants to judge a critical day, he should observe the time when the Moon will come to the fourth aspect of the place in which it was at the beginning of the disease, and if it then conjoins with benevolent planets or aspects them with a laudable aspect, or if it conjoins or aspects fixed stars that are of the nature of fortunes, it signifies that the crisis will be for good. And if it conjoins or aspects misfortunes, it signifies the contrary, unless the misfortunes are contrary to the matter of the disease and with this the misfortune is in its hayz, because then it can signify good, but this is by accident. For example, if the illness is phlegmatic and the Moon aspects Mars, it signifies good. And when the Moon reaches a good place whose side subtends the octagon in the equator, it will be an indicative day. The side of the octagon is 45 degrees, and it is half of the fourth aspect. And although it is not an aspect, it has a greater convenience with the aspect than other places. And therefore, when the Moon is in the fourth aspect, it should be conjoined with fortunes when it reaches the middle of that place, then nature feels relief and begins to rise against the matter of the disease by digesting it, and then signs of digestion appear in the urine, and sometimes a crisis occurs on the fourth day, that is, when the Moon finds a fortunate planet there. Then the signs of digestion should precede at the time when the Moon reaches the place whose side subtends 16 angles, and this is the middle of the octagon. Let these suffice concerning the causes of critical days. Ptolemy says in the 70th proposition of Centiloquium that when the Moon is in opposition to the Sun mixed with nebulous stars, it signifies inseparable diseases in the eyes. And similarly, if the Moon is occidental and in the angles, both malefics are occidental, ascending after the Moon, and the Sun is in the angle, and both malefics are ascending before the Sun and opposite to it, that is, one to the other, the native will lose both eyes. Haly says in his commentary on the same that the greater impediment in the two luminaries is when there are two malefics, that is, Saturn and Mars, ascending before the Sun and after the Moon, and one of them is in opposition to the other. And the Sun signifies the right eye, and the Moon the left. And it is inevitable that he will lose both eyes when it is so.

[Illnesses of the Spirit and Body]
The significator in his nativity is in this manner. Nebulous stars are like the Twins, and the place where the water that Aquarius pours falls, the drops of Leo, and others that do not shine. Daly Abenragel says in the reasons for this house, we first want to speak in this chapter about the occasions and accidents that occur in the spirit, which are illnesses of the spirit. Afterwards, we will speak about those that occur in the body, which are illnesses of the body. Then he says, I say that demons are those who do not have Mercury with the Moon in any aspect in their nativities, with none of them aspecting the Ascendant; and the stronger one in his nativity, if it is diurnal, is Saturn; if nocturnal, Mars. And whichever of them is in the angles, this is the nativity of demons. When the Sun is afflicted by infortunes or by the lord of the house of illness, and is above the earth in a diurnal nativity, or the Moon is in such an affliction below the earth in a nocturnal nativity, the native will suffer blindness in the right eye. And if this misfortune of the Sun is below the earth in a nocturnal nativity, or above the earth for the Moon in a diurnal nativity, this damage and blindness will be in the left eye. When the Sun and Moon are both in the sixth house, afflicted, the native will undoubtedly be blind. When Mercury is conjoined with Saturn or in his square or opposition aspect, or is cadent from an angle in a vile and unfortunate place, or is combust or retrograde, or peregrine in a mute sign, the native, from any of these significations, will have a damaged or mute tongue. When Mercury is the lord of the sixth house, or in opposition to Saturn, the native will be deaf. The greater and stronger signification of muteness is when the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of its exaltation, and the lord of its triplicity, and Mercury and the Moon are all in mute signs. When the Sun is unfortunate or afflicted below the earth, it signifies affliction of the stomach. And when the Moon is afflicted below the earth, it signifies affliction of the lungs. And if Mars is in this manner, it signifies affliction of the liver. And if Saturn is in this manner, it signifies affliction of the spleen. And if Mercury is in this manner, it signifies affliction of the gall. Ptolemy says in the 89th proposition of the Centiloquium that it is detestable in the signification of illness for the significator of the question to enter under the rays, or for the Part of Fortune to be unfortunate. Daly Abenragel says in the questions of this house, if you are asked about someone ill, whether he will recover or not: look at the Moon and the Sun and the almuten of the Ascendant; and if they are free from misfortunes and do not have an aspect with the lord of the house of death, I say he will escape from that illness. And if two of them are as we said, he will likewise escape. And if the Moon and the almuten of the Ascendant, especially if she is the lady of the time (i.e., if the question is nocturnal), have an aspect with the lord of the house of death, he will not be able to be freed from death. And whenever any of the significators applies to an infortune, the illness will be strengthened until it separates from it. The time of death will be when the almuten of the Ascendant or the Moon conjoins with the lord of the house of death, or with the infortune that afflicted it, or applies to its square or opposition aspect. Here he places the significations of the seventh house. The seventh house. And he says that the seventh house signifies women and marriages and conditions and oppositions. Anduzgam

[Marriage and Relationships]
He said that the first lord of the triplicity of the seventh house signifies women. The second signifies contentions. The third, participations and mixtures. Ptolemy says in the reasons for this house, it is fitting that I look at the state of the Moon in the nativity hour of the man for marriage, so that first I look at the Moon: if it is in the two eastern quarters, the man's marriage will be in his youth or he will marry a young girl after he has advanced in years. And if it is in the two western quarters, the marriage will be late or he will marry an old woman. And if the Moon is under the rays and participates with Saturn, he will never marry. And if it applies to Saturn, he will marry a laborious and wicked woman. And if it applies to Jupiter, the woman will be of good abstinence and good ornament. And if it applies to Mars, she will be bold and proud. And if it applies to Venus, she will be beautiful and of good reception. And if it applies to Mercury, she will be good, intelligent, and of good words. And it is fitting that I look at the marriage of women from the state of the Sun in her nativity hour, so that if the Sun is in the two eastern quarters, the marriage of the woman who has such a nativity will be in her youth or she will marry a young man after she has advanced in years. And if it is in the two western quarters, she will marry late or an old man after she has advanced in years. And if the Sun participates with Saturn, the husband will be of good law, a lover of labor. And if he has participation with Jupiter, he will be of good abstinence, noble of heart. If with Mars, he will be strong of heart without any love. If with Venus, he will be pure. If with Mercury, he will be proficient in his deeds and a doer of many things. Daly Abenragel says in the questions of this house: If someone asks you about marriage, whether it will happen or not, look at the Ascendant and its lord and the Moon and the planet from which it separates, and give these as significators of the querent; and the seventh house and its lord and the planet to which the Moon applies as significators of the one about whom the question is asked. And if the querent is male, conjoin the Sun with its significators and make it participate in the signification. And if the querent is female, give her Venus and make her participate in the signification. Afterwards, look at what kind of application the lord of the Ascendant or the Moon has with the lord of the seventh house, and what kind of application the planet from which the Moon separates has with the planet to which it applies, or Venus with the Sun. Therefore, if the lord of the Ascendant or the Moon applies to the lord of the seventh house, or the planet from which the Moon separates applies to the planet to which it applies, or the lord of the Ascendant or the Moon is in the seventh house, it signifies that the querent will have the thing sought, but with many petitions and prayers. And if the application is by square or opposition, it signifies that this will be with delay and labor and pain. But if the lord of the seventh house applies to the lord of the Ascendant, or the planet to which the Moon applies applies to the planet from which it separates, or the lord of the seventh is in the Ascendant, that thing will happen easily and with great willingness of the woman and her part, especially if that application is by trine or sextile. And if you find no application between the significators, it signifies that the thing will not happen. If someone asks you if he will fulfill his desire with a woman that night or not, look if you find Venus aspecting the Ascendant in the question. I say his desire will be fulfilled that night. And if the question is whether he had intercourse with that woman last night or not, judge this in the same way, no more and no less. If you are asked about a woman, whether she is a virgin or not, look at the Ascendant and its lord and the Moon, and if you find them in fixed signs, say that she is a virgin, safe from all blemish, pure. And if she is in common or mutable signs, say that she is a woman and has or had a husband. And

[On the Eighth House]
If the question is about a girl who says she is a virgin, say: she is corrupted and has had relations with others. If someone asks you about a woman, how many husbands she will have, look from the lord of the tenth house to the degree of Mars, and as many planets as you find between them, so many husbands she will have. And if Mars is in the seventh house, look from Mars to Jupiter in the same way and judge according to that, and you will be certain with God. Here are placed the significations of the eighth house. The eighth house is the house of death and fear, and it signifies inheritances of the dead which the heirs should possess after death. It also signifies the end of the years of life after old age. Anduzgamus says that the lord of the triplicity of this house signifies fear. The second signifies precepts and ancient things. The third signifies inheritances of the dead. Ptolemy says it is fitting that you look at the state of the degree of the killer, which planet is there or aspects it, and according to the nature of that planet will be the judgment of death. So if Saturn is the lord of death, it will occur due to long illnesses, due to consumption, namely rheumatism, and due to a defect of nature, etc., such things. And if Jupiter is the lord of death, death will be due to apostemata of the throat and lungs, etc., of this kind. And if it is Mars, death will be due to continuous and acute fevers. And if it is Venus, death will occur due to illness of the stomach and liver and heart, and by flux of blood and apostemata going through the body and fistulas. And if it is Mercury, death will be due to epilepsy and due to foolishness and loss of sense. Haly says in the commentary on the 15th proposition of the fourth part: Ptolemy divided death for us into two kinds: one comes from illnesses. The other comes from a thing in which the physician has nothing to see, such as one who dies by sword, spear, fall, fire, and bite of beast and wild animal, or drowning in water, and many other occasions. And when the governing planets are safe from misfortunes and in their own dignities and powerful, and when no contrary planet is elevated over them, then death will occur due to illnesses. But another death occurs when the planets are unfortunate or weak or in alien dignities contrary to them, or when contrary planets are elevated over them. To narrate all the ways in which death occurs would be too long here, and whoever wishes to find this will find it in the fourth part of Ptolemy's Quadripartitum. Ptolemy says in the 74th proposition of the Centiloquium: When Mars is corporally conjoined to the head of Algol and the Moon does not aspect the ascendant, nor is Fortune in the 8th house, and the lord of the anareta of the luminaries is opposite Mars or in its fourth aspect, the native's head will be cut off. But if the luminary is in the midheaven, he will be hanged. And if malefics aspect from Gemini and Pisces, his hands and feet will be cut off. Haly says in the commentary that when Fortune is in the eighth house, it prohibits a bad death. Indeed, I heard from someone who was with the very spirited son of Haly at sea, who, when he wanted to enter the sea, which was too tumultuous with winds agitating the waves, rebuked him, saying: I do not fear death at sea. For Jupiter was in my nativity in the house of death and oriental, which prohibits a bad death for me. And I saw him die in bed. It also happened to me that Adam's servants showed me the nativity of their lord's son, and I found the Sun in the midheaven, and he was the lord of the anareta and hylech, and Mars in his fourth aspect, and Saturn in the angle of his earth, the ascendant being Pisces. Therefore, terrified, I delayed giving judgment, saying: it is necessary that before I judge, the days of nourishment be completed. But when I was very solicitous about the boy, investigating his movements or deaths, I understood nothing from which I would fear for him the truncation of hands and feet and hanging, since he was gentle and modest. But when he reached 30 years, Adam's men entered the house, and fleeing, they were accused of fraud against the one who ruled the city, and they were caught in that house, and he with them lost his hands and feet and was hanged. And I saw him without hands and feet, hanged. Ptolemy says in the 59th proposition of the Centiloquium: when you are asked about an absent person, do not judge his death until you remove drunkenness from him, nor a wounded person until you remove bloodletting, nor acquired substance until you remove money entrusted to him. For the judgment is the same for these men. Haly says in the commentary there: he who deals with judgments judges by forms that are close to the truth. Therefore, there is no difference in the strength of judgments between a sleeping person and a dead person, and between a wounded person and a bloodletting person, nor between him to whom money is entrusted and him who acquired it. Indeed, I heard from my father, may God spare him, when he was with those who hid from the emperor's face, with Abraham, son of Almos, whom Albashten, son of Abraham, an astrologer, visited daily secretly, who advised him to bring a large bronze shell full of water, in which he placed a stool, and advised him to sit on it for the greater part of the day. And he advised this so that he might make the emperor's astrologers err in the matter of his hiding, and when the emperor asked his astrologers where he was, they said that he was in the middle of the sea. Haly Aberagel says that when Mars is in the eighth house, damaging the lord of the eighth house, the native's death will be by iron. And if Saturn is in the eighth house, damaging the lord of the eighth house, the native's death will be due to prison and punishments. When the Moon is in the eighth house with the Dragon's Tail, it signifies that the native's death is due to a secession or a laxative medicine. When Mercury is in the eighth house with the Tail, it signifies that the native's death will be due to evil deeds or due to poison or acts of necromancy. When the degree of the occident and its lord are both damaged, they signify a bad death for the native. When the Sun is damaged in a diurnal nativity or the Moon in a nocturnal nativity, it signifies the same. When the significators are damaged above the earth, they signify a manifest and open death. And when they are damaged below the earth, death will be hidden and secret. When any unfortunate planet is in the eighth house or conjoined to the lord of the eighth house, it signifies a strong and bad death. And if any fortunate planet is in the eighth house or conjoined to the lord of the eighth house, it signifies a good and beautiful death. And if Jupiter or Venus is in this house, strong and free from the rays of the unfortunate planets, the native will be fortunate and praised and will live 73 years, and perhaps more. Here are placed the significations of the ninth house. The ninth house signifies peregrinations and long journeys, and it signifies epistles and envoys and rumors and dreams. Anduzgamus says that the lord of the triplicity of this house signifies peregrinations and everything that happens to him in peregrinations; the second signifies faith and religion; the third signifies wisdom and

[The Tenth House]
Daly Abenragel says in the reasons for this house: look at the journeys of the native, and then at the lord of the triplicity of the house of journeys. For when the lord of the triplicity of the house of journeys is first in good state, strong, fortunate, and received, it signifies honors there through journeys, and he will move from one place to another and will be fortunate in journeys. And if he is in a state different from what we have said, he will have impediments and burdens in his journeys and movements, and he will be despised in them, and he will be extracted and expelled from his land and place, nor will he have any utility or profit in his journeys. And if the lord of the triplicity of the house of journeys is second, and is in good state, strong, and received, the native will be of good law, religious, and a keeper of the law. And if he is in a different state, he will be of bad law, will be called evil, and will be of evil works and incredulous. And if the lord of the triplicity is third, and is in good state, the native will be a truthful interpreter of dreams, and whatever he sees in dreams will be true and will not lie. The same Daly says: know that Mercury has power and proper signification in the cause of law and legality, separately from other planets. And know that if he is in the house of Saturn or in his aspect, the native will be of deep thoughts, firm in belief, praising the things of the other world more than this one, and believing them and thinking much about them and loving them, and holding that the things of that world are better than this one. He will abhor games, jokes, and comforts; humble and patient of labor and indigence, especially if the falling fortunes are not aspecting the ascendant. And if Mercury is in the house of Jupiter, or in his aspect, the native will be of good name, good law and legality, and will be an observer of the law. And if he is in the house of Mars, or in his aspect, and the same aspect is from the fourth or opposition, the native will be a murderer, irascible, a malefactor, of bad law, and will despise his law. The tenth house. Here he places the significations of the tenth house. It is the house of kingdom and sublimation and exaltation of memory and voice in command and magistracies and also of the mother. And it signifies the middle half of the house. Andugaz says: the lord of the triplicity of the tenth house. The first signifies the work of the native and his exaltation and the sublimation of his seat. The second signifies the voice of command and boldness in commanding. The third signifies its stability and durability, that is, how long it will last in its dominion. Ptolemy says in the 5th proposition of the Centiloquium: the ascendants of the enemies of the kingdom are those falling from the ascendant of the same, and the ascendants of those dominating in that angle of it. But the ascendants of the ministers are the succeeding angles. The ascendants of cities, however, in their constructions, judge all things that will happen in them. But the ascendants that are in the ordinances of kings of certain cities predict all things that will happen under their kingdom. And the ascendant of the appearance of any sect in those cities, namely, shows whatever will be under that sect in those cities. Daly says there in the commentary that the cadent signs are those of which there is no angle or after the angle; there are four: namely, the twelfth, third, sixth, and ninth from the ascendant. And he says that it is known to every astrologer that when the ascendant of a nativity, or any angle of it, is the ascendant or any angle of the inception of a kingdom, or of the nativity of someone to whom a kingdom is suitable, a kingdom will be perfected for him in that kingdom; and there will be honor for him in that, and not in another. Indeed, ancient kings observed the nativities of all born in their kingdoms, and whose ascendant they found to be the house of the enemies of the kingdom, or the sixth or third or ninth, they killed the child, because his kingdom would be against their kingdom. And after a few interpolations, he says that the ascendant of any city is the sign whose ascent begins when someone places the first stone in it. The ascendant of a sect is the ascendant sign at the time when that sect begins to prevail over another sect and the inhabitants have adopted it; and that signifies how long it will last, and what will happen in it as long as it lasts. Daly Abenragel says: when the sign of the midheaven is of the fiery signs, especially if it is Leo or Aries, and the Sun is in it, and the part of the king is there in the aspect of fortune, the native will undoubtedly be a king. The eleventh house. Here he places the significations of the eleventh house. He says that the eleventh house is the house of fortune, trust, and praise, and of friends and ministers and helpers; and it signifies the last half of middle life. Andugaz said: the lord of the triplicity of the house of trust, the first, signifies trust. The second signifies friends. The third signifies their utilities or profits. Ptolemy says in the 39th proposition of the Centiloquium: the evil of the eleventh house and its lord in the enthronement of kings signifies what will happen to his counselors and his substance from evil; and in the same way, the evil of the second will signify that the people will gain little with that king. Daly says in the commentary: astrologers have agreed on this: the tenth house in every ordination of kings is its place, and the eleventh is of his helpers and his substance, and the ascendant is of the people, and the second is of the substance of the people; and therefore the eleventh impedes the counselors, and the second the substance of the people. Daly Abenragel says in the reasons for this house: look at the lord of the triplicity of this house, the first. If you find him received, fortunate, and strong, indicate that the native will have many friends, gains, utility, and good from them. And if he is unfortunate and damaged, the native will be solitary among men, will not have friendship with anyone, and will withdraw and distance himself from those who seek his love and companionship. And if the lord of the triplicity of this house, the second, is strong, fortunate, and received, he will be fortunate, honored, and rich, abundant in good state and good life. And if he is different from this state, he will be laborious, and indigent, and manifestly poor and miserable. And if the lord of the triplicity of this house, the third, is fortunate, strong, and in good state, the native will have children who will remain after him in good state, and riches, and his fortune. And if he is unfortunate, weak, and cadent, and in bad state, the native will not have a son who remains after him, nor an heir of his generation. And know that the best state that can be in the cause of friends is that the lord of the ascendant is received by the lord of the eleventh house, the same lord of the eleventh house being fortunate and in good state. For when it is so, he will have love and agreement with companions and friends. The twelfth house. Here he places the significations of the 12th house. He says that the 12th house signifies enemies and labors, sadness and envy, and whisperings and cunning, and beasts that are ridden, and it signifies the end.

[Significations of the Twelfth House]
Anduzgar says that the first day of the triplicity of this house signifies enemies, the second signifies labors, the third great beasts. He concludes by saying: 'Best of all, it signifies.' Daly Abenragel says in the judgments of this house: 'Look first at the lord of the triplicity of this house. If you find him fortunate, strong, and elevated, judge that the native's enemies will lean upon him and do whatever they wish. But if he is cadent, afflicted, combust, or peregrine, the native will lean upon his enemies, and they will be hindered, and the evil they intended for the native will befall them. And if the lord of the triplicity of this house is fortunate, the native will have moderate sorrows and anxieties. But if he is in an adverse state, there will be many impieties and sorrows, and labors, impediments, and great losses will befall him in what he possesses and in his body. And if the lord of the third triplicity of this house is fortunate, the native will be dialectical and of good eloquence, and fortunate in his reasons and causes, and he will prosper against any adversary. But if he is in an adverse state, he will be weak in reason and impeded in speech, and he will have no right against his adversaries and evildoers.'

[House Colors and Planetary Joys]
The twelve houses also signify colors. Here are the significations of the houses as to colors: The first and seventh are white. The second and twelfth are green. The third and eleventh are yellow. The fourth and tenth are red. The fifth and ninth are the color of honey. The sixth and eighth are black. Afterwards, it says that each of the planets has an accidental power in some of these houses, which is called joy. Mercury rejoices in the Ascendant. The Moon rejoices in the third house. Venus in the fifth. Mars in the sixth. The Sun in the ninth. Jupiter in the eleventh. Saturn in the twelfth. Then it says that the angles signify strength, order, and perfection. Those cadent from the angles, however, signify weakness and detriment, except for the ninth and third houses. The third signifies a suitable thing, revealed with fame, and also that these are the joys of the luminaries, as it was already said that the Sun rejoices in the ninth and the Moon in the third. And the twelfth and sixth houses signify concealment and vileness of things. Afterwards, it says that the angles, namely the first house, the tenth, the seventh, and the fourth, and the lords of these angles, signify greatness of honor and fortune, and remoteness from fall and misfortune. And the presence of the lords of the angles in the cadent houses from the angles signifies misfortune and disgrace of falls. And the second house succeeds the tenth, and its lord signifies medium fortune, that is, it signifies fortune, but not as great as the tenth. And the fifth house succeeds the fourth, signifying medium fortune through gifts and the cause of children. And the eighth house and its lord signify medium fortune through the cause of ministers and helpers. And the eighth house and its lord signify medium fortune through the cause of inheritances from the dead and from hidden things.

[Lords of Angles in Angles]
Afterwards, it sets forth the significations of the lords of the angles when they are present in those angles. And it says that the presence of the lord of the Ascendant in the Ascendant signifies his fortune through himself and through his own acquisition. And if he is in the seventh, it signifies acquisition through wives. And if he is in the tenth, it signifies acquisition of magistracies. And if he is in the fourth, it signifies acquisitions through inheritances and through the cause of fathers and through the production of waters, the population of lands, and from ancient and radical things (another letter has 'and radical things'). The presence of the lord of the tenth in the tenth house signifies fortune through the king and great kingdom and high magistracies. And if he is in the seventh, it signifies kingdom through victory, contention, and through the cause of men. And if he is in the fourth, it signifies kingdom through the cause of the king's ministers and through the cultivation of lands and through the building of cities and the division of rivers and through the guardianship of cities and from ancient things. And if he is in the Ascendant, it signifies kingdom through ingenuity and through the king's ingenuity and from the things of the common people.

[Lords of Seventh and Fourth in Angles]
The presence of the lord of the seventh house in the seventh house signifies fortune through negotiations and through conventions and commendations, that is, deposits and through wives and through benefactors. And if he is in the fourth, it signifies fortune through conventions and negotiations and through the causes of fathers and inheritances and the cultivation of land. And if he is in the Ascendant, it signifies fortune through conventions and negotiations and through the causes of medicine and astronomy and through spiritual things and ingenuity and other similar things. And if he is present in the tenth, it signifies fortune through conventions and negotiations and through men and through the causes of the kingdom. The presence of the lord of the fourth house in the fourth house signifies fortune from fruit and through the causes of fathers and through ancient things. And if he is present in the Ascendant, it signifies fortune from the cultivation of land and fruit through depth of counsel and ingenuity; and if he is present in the tenth house, it signifies profit from the cultivation of land and fruit through the cause of kings and magistracies. And if he is present in the seventh house, it signifies fortune from the cultivation of land and fruit and from the part of the wife and through the cause of men and benefactors and through negotiations. Then it says that these things signify the lords of the angles when they are present in those angles. And as it was said about the angles, so you should understand about the other houses in their own way, according to the nature of each house. It says that it introduced the lords of the angles so that they might be an example in the other houses. When you wish to know the ruling planet, the author teaches how to choose the significator, and it can be divided into two parts: in the first part, it does what has been said. In the second part, it gives an example there. For example, the author's opinion is this: that in knowing the significator of a thing, we must look at two things. First, we must look at the house in which the nature of that thing whose significator we seek is located. Second, we must look at the planet that by its nature signifies that thing. For example, if a question is asked about substance, we must look at the second house, which is the house of substance; and with this, we must look at Jupiter, who by his own nature signifies substance. And if a question is asked about a woman, we must look at the seventh house, which is the house of a woman, and with this, we must look at Venus, who by her own nature is the significatrix of women. And so for others, according to the proper natures of the houses and planets. It is to be understood, however, that the planet we choose from the part of the house we must hold as the principal significator. And the planet that signifies the nature of the thing we must make a participant in the signification. Therefore, the meaning of the text is: when you wish to know the ruling planet or significator of a thing, look at which of the planets has more strengths in the house of the thing, from the strengths mentioned in the chapter on their strengths and dignities. And the one who abounds in the number of strengths, that one is the ruler or significator. And it is to be understood that in interrogations, the Ascendant or the first house is always attributed to the querent. The planet abounding in the number of strengths in the house of the thing about which the question is asked is the significator of the thing sought. The author gives an example in the text. And he says: if you have been asked about substance, and you wish to know which of the planets is the ruler or significator, and the second house, which is the house of substance, is, for example, the degree of Aries, because Aries is the house of Mars, Mars has strengths there. And it is the exaltation of the Sun, and therefore the Sun has four strengths by reason of that. And it is the triplicity of the Sun, and by reason of that, it has three strengths there; and it is the term of Jupiter, and by reason of that, it has two strengths there; and the face of Mars, and by reason of that, it has one strength there. Therefore, the Sun has seven strengths there, and Mars six, and Jupiter two. It is clear, therefore, that the Sun has more strengths there. And such a planet, that is, having more strengths, is called Almuten, that is, the victor. Therefore, the Sun in such a figure would be the significator of substance, and in the same way, it must be done for others.

[Accidental Planetary Powers and Hayz]
Also, concerning the accidental powers of the planets. Thus, the author first determined the essential dignities of the planets. Here he determines their accidental dignities, and he explains himself very briefly, saying that there is an accidental dignity of the planets called Hayz, and it is this: that a diurnal planet is above the earth by day and below the earth by night. And a nocturnal planet is above the earth by night and below the earth by day. And if a masculine planet is in a masculine sign and a feminine planet in a feminine sign, then that planet is in its Hayz, that is, in its similitude; and its strength will then be like the strength of a man in the place of his perfect gain of fortune. And if the exposition of the first part of Alchabitius's Introduction to the Art of Judgments of the Stars is complete. Someone asked about an absent person, whether he was dead or alive, and the Ascendant of the question was the 20th degree of Leo, and such a figure occurred. Question about an absent person, whether he is alive or not.

[A Horary Question on Life and Death]
In this question, I looked at the ascendant and its lord, and the Moon, for whom the question was asked. I looked and found the lord of the ascendant in the midheaven, which at first glance seemed to indicate prosperity. But because I found Saturn in the angular house of the East, near the angle, within two degrees, I doubted the life of that person, especially because the Part of Fortune was unfortunate there. Then I looked at the house of death and found Venus stronger there, that is, in the house of death, having more testimonies because of exaltation and triplicity. I looked at its place in the figure and how it related to the ascendant, to the lord of the ascendant, and to the Moon, and I found it aspecting the ascendant with a quartile aspect, and Saturn existing there with the same aspect, which made me doubt life even more. Then I looked at the Moon and found it oppressed under the Sun's rays; this was one sign of death. I also found the Moon separated from Venus, going to the conjunction of the lord of the ascendant, and it transferred the nature of the lord of the house of death to the lord of the ascendant. This was a more certain sign of death. From these, I concluded that the man for whom the question was asked was dead, and it was found to be so. And because Saturn, being in the ascendant, was the lord of the seventh house, signifying the wife of the person for whom the question was asked, and Venus, signifying death, aspected him, this signified that perhaps the deceased had committed fornication with the wife of the person for whom the question was asked. The second difference in the natures of the seven planets. This is the second difference of this book, in which the author determines the natures of the seven planets. And it can be divided into four parts: first, it determines the natures and properties of the seven planets. Second, it determines the order or principality of the planets in perceptions. Third, concerning the nature of the head and tail of the dragon. Fourth, it determines the order of the planets in the lordship of days and hours. The second part begins there: 'concerning the order of the planets'. The third there: 'the head of the dragon'. The fourth there: 'if there is any day'. The first part is divided into seven parts: first, it sets out the nature of Saturn. Second, Jupiter. Third, Mars. Fourth, the Sun. Fifth, Venus. Sixth, Mercury. Seventh, the Moon. Where the parts begin is clear in the text. First, it sets out the nature of Saturn and what it signifies from things and human customs and from sects and so on, all of which clearly appears in the text up to that part about the years of Fridaria. Concerning that part, it is to be understood when it says 'the years of Fridaria of Saturn are', it is to be understood as the year of governance in the life of the native. For the elucidation of this, it is to be known that in a diurnal nativity, Fridaria begins with the Sun and governs it for 10 years. Afterwards, Venus governs it according to the quantity of its years. Then Mercury: thus according to the order of the planets, going to the end of life. If, however, the nativity is nocturnal, the governance begins with the Moon and governs it according to the quantity of its years. After the Moon, Saturn governs it according to the quantity of its years, and so according to the order of the planets. There is a proper chapter on this in the fourth difference, and there it will speak more extensively about this, God willing. When it says in the text: 'the greatest', it is to be understood concerning the years that the planets give in the duration of things, namely in sects and in other great matters. When it says 'greater and middle and lesser', it is to be understood concerning the years that the planets give in the nativities of men for living: and as I say about Saturn, so you should understand about the other planets. Ptolemy says in the 82nd proposition of the first part that the greater and stronger work of Saturn is to cool and dry a little because of the strength of cold: and he sees this as being because it is very far from the heat of the Sun and the humid vapors of the earth. Albumazar refutes Ptolemy, and I will, God willing, present his reasons at the end of this part on the natures of the planets. Daly says in the commentary on the aforementioned proposition that Ptolemy means that Saturn performs this work because its work is very far from the work of the Sun, which is the work of heat, and from the Moon, whose work is to attract humors: because when he looked at the comparison of Saturn with the Sun and Moon, he found that it was contrary to both, and because of this, he said that it is fitting that it be cold and dry. And Ptolemy himself glossed this comparison in what follows. Ptolemy says that to know the virtue of this planet and others will be for the rectification of figures in respect to the Sun and Moon, because we see some of them changing the air in one manner of change and some of them in another manner in different arrangements of change, increasing and decreasing. Daly says in the commentary: 'If you remember what we told you by which I can prove the virtues of the stars, you do not need a gloss in this. And if you have forgotten this, listen. I tell you that the Sun and Moon, because their works are more apparent than the works of other stars, are more manifest to us: and the works of the remaining stars seem hidden: it is fitting that you look at the stars having commonality with the two luminaries through figures: that is, through aspects, whether they increase in their works or diminish from them: and so you will look at all of them: until you know the certainty of all, not once but many times. And if you find that they always follow one manner of operating, you will know for certain what kind of virtue they have.' Daly Abenragel says about the nature of Saturn: 'Saturn is an old, great, weary, despised planet of anxieties, sadness, and long illnesses. Its nature is cold and dry and it is assimilated to melancholy, which is governed by all humors, and none by it. When it is the almuten of a nativity, and it is in Cancer, the native will be of a very ugly face and a marvelous creature in its form and vision, so that all who see him and hear him spoken of will be terrified and amazed.' Alfraganus says that the body of Saturn is 91 times as large as the Earth. Jupiter is a masculine fortune. Here he sets out the nature of Jupiter, and what he says in the text is clear. 'The virtue of Jupiter, however, is of a temperate complexion, and its place of motion is median between the coldness of Saturn and the heat of Mars, and because of this, it happens that it heats and moistens.' Daly says in the commentary: 'Many believed, when they heard this word of Ptolemy, that the works of the stars, according to his opinion, followed the places of the spheres according to whether one existed above another, as believed by Hiza, Avenquiton, Alkindus, and others who hindered us with such reasons. But I say that the works of the stars are according to nature, how can quadrivial propositions be written, since the roots of these two sciences are diverse, one from the other. Furthermore, if all celestial bodies are not of any complexion: hot, humid, cold, nor dry, as Aristotle proved, how can Jupiter's complexion be temperate because its sphere exists between those of Mars and Saturn? For if you look closely at Ptolemy's statement, you will find that it is not as they believed. And after he taught us the way by which we might know the virtues of the stars, he puts this another way in this place, saying that since we have proven the mode of operation that operates in the air surrounding us, we have found it to be median between the great coldness that Saturn makes and the great heat that Mars makes, and this affirms what he said, that it heats and moistens.' Daly Abenragel says: 'Jupiter is the planet of equality, community, goodness, improvement, intellect, sense, and piety: it is temperate, equal, and a fortune. By aspect and bodily conjunction, it signifies goodness, improvement, law, simplicity, and chastity. It directs and does not condemn; it populates and does not destroy; it abhors Saturn and its natures. When God began to create the world, it was in the ascending house, shining in Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; and its light diminished in Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. It darkens in Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius; its darkening diminishes in Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.' Alfraganus says that the body of Jupiter is 95 times as large as the Earth. Mars is masculine. Here he sets out the nature of Mars, and Mars properly dries and by the force of its nature burns because it has a fiery color, and because it is around the Sun, and because the sphere in which the Sun is placed is below it. Daly says in the commentary: 'Ptolemy means that the work of the virtue of Mars, that is, what we experience, we find to be of great dryness. To what he said, that the virtue of Mars burns because it has a fiery color, I say that the stars are simple substances and not composed of the natures of diverse elements: the appearance of their color is correct because there is nothing there that changes the color suitable to the same substance. Ptolemy, however, teaches us by this saying a rule by which we know the virtue of the stars, which we cannot understand by ourselves, and we can understand it.

[Mercury's Influence on Weather and Ptolemy's Theories]
of the planets signifying rains, and through it and through its change from sign to sign, and through its state, retrogradation, and direct motion, and its oppositions and conjunctions, they will know the movements of the winds and their strengths, whether they will be strong or weak in all parts of that year. For when it is in one sign and enters another, or when it is stationary or retrograde, it signifies strong winds, humidity, and rain, and in the air, disturbances from clouds and similar things. Similarly, that which is in opposition to the Moon, with the Moon existing in any of the watery or airy signs, signifies what is predicted. In the revolution of the years of the world, it has great and true significance over those holding offices of kings. Alfraganus says that the quantity of Mercury's body is one part of 32,000 parts of the Earth's body. A fortunate female nocturnal planet places the nature of the Moon. The meaning of the letter is clear. Ptolemy says the greater virtue of the Moon is to moisten, because it is very close to the Earth and because of the cold smokiness that is elevated by it. And because of this, manifest bodies change to such a state, for it causes bodies to change and putrefy for the most part. And it also has a small participation with the Sun in heat, because it receives light from it. Albumazar refutes Ptolemy on the cause of the natures of the planets, and his words are these: because many kings of Greece were wise after Alexander, son of Philip, and each of them was called Ptolemy; there were ten of them, and one woman; they reigned in Egypt; and the years of their reign were 275. All of them were wise, among whom was Ptolemy, who published the book Almagest on the cause of the motion of the circle and whatever is in it concerning the planets. And one of them published a book on the judgments of the stars, referring it to Ptolemy, the author of the book Almagest. It is said that he who published the book of judgments also published the book Almagest; the truth of this matter is unknown. But he who among them published the book of judgments narrated in his book the natures of the planets and their causes. He began to say that the Sun heats with sweetness and delay, and that its work in this is more evident and stronger than the work of the other planets because of its magnitude, and the more it rises to the zenith of our heads, the more its heat increases for us. And he thought that the nature of the Moon is humid because of the proximity of its circle to the Earth and because of the reception of vapors that rise from it. And he thought that the nature of Saturn is cold and dry because of the length of its circle from the heat of the Sun and its distance from the humidity of the Earth's vapors. And he thought that Mars' nature is hot and dry because its color is similar to fire, and it is near the Sun, and it is below it, and its heat rises to it and heats it. And he thought that Jupiter is of an equal complexion, because its circle is between the circles of Saturn and Mars. And for this reason, its nature is hot, humid, equal, and temperate. And he thought that Venus's nature is hot, humid, and equal. Its heat, however, is from the proximity of its circle to the Sun. Its humidity, however, is from the humid vapor that reaches it from the Earth. He thought that Mercury's nature is dry at certain times and humid at others. Its dryness is due to its proximity to the Sun and because it does not move far from it. Its humidity, however, is due to the proximity of its circle to the Moon's circle. This is what Ptolemy worked on regarding the natures of the planets, and this is the reasoning he used for it. But we will now say that there is something to be criticized in his words, that is, worthy of reprehension. For he thought that the Sun heats things with sweetness and delay, and he found this from his work. But what he said, that the nature of the Moon is humid because of the proximity of its circle to the Earth and the reception of vapors that rise from the Earth to it, this is refuted by the wise, because the space between the surface of the Earth and the nearest place where the Moon is, is 128,044 miles, approximately, by the measure that one mile is 1,000 cubits. And this is clear in the book in which the distances of the superior bodies from each other are narrated. And vapors do not rise more than 16 stadia from the Earth's surface, according to what Ptolemy narrated, which is 400 cubits; for 16 stadia make two miles and a tenth and a thirteenth of one mile, approximately. The length of the Moon, which is closest to the Earth's surface, is, as we said, approximately 128,044 miles. How then can the Earth's vapor reach the Moon so as to corrupt or change its nature? In a similar way, he refutes him on the natures of the other planets, but I pass over this for brevity. Daly, in his commentary on the aforementioned opposition regarding the nature of the Moon, refers to Albumazar's arguments. Daly, explaining Ptolemy's words, says: Ptolemy taught us that the virtues of the stars follow the magnitude of their bodies, and the Moon's body is small, as narrated in the Almagest, and its work follows the Sun's work in one part. He says here that this is because it is very close to the Earth, and its virtue reaches us quickly, and because of this, its work appears more than the work of other stars. And we see visibly that it attracts the humors of the Earth and the bodies that follow it, and because it has light from the Sun, it operates in earthly things with a moderate accidental heat, with which it causes the humors existing in bodies to putrefy and change, as shown in physics and in nature. And it is manifest that light causes heat, and this can be proven by mirrors that burn and similar things. And since the Moon has light from the Sun, it is fitting that it has a moderate heat, which it produces as if by accident. And this is what Ptolemy means to say. And because Albumazar did not understand this, he believed that he erred in his statement, saying, "How can humid smokiness ascend to the Moon when smokiness cannot ascend beyond 16 stadia, and the Moon is quite far?" I, however, laughed at such statements as these, and I said, "How did he not understand this?" For Ptolemy did not mean to say that humid smokiness ascends all the way to the Moon, but he said that the ascent of humid smokiness towards the Moon teaches us that it attracts the humors of the Earth and other bodies following it, just as a magnet attracts iron. Alfraganus says, on the authority of Ptolemy, that the magnitude of the Moon's body is one part of 39 parts of the Earth; and he says that the largest body of all bodies is the Sun, and after the Sun, the largest stars are 15. For he says that each of them contains the Earth 107 times. Third in magnitude is Jupiter, and fourth is Saturn. After Saturn are the fixed stars of the second order, each of which contains the Earth 90 times. After them are the stars of the third order, each of which contains the Earth 72 times. After them are the stars of the fourth order, each of which contains the Earth 54 times. After them are the stars of the fifth order, each of which contains the Earth 37 times. After them are the stars of the sixth order, and the smallest of them, indeed the smallest of all that are seen, the proof of which is placed.

[Planetary Distances and Rulerships]
The Earth contains 18. The largest body after them is Mars. After Mars, Earth. After Earth, Venus. After Venus, the Moon. And lastly, Mercury. It is clear, therefore, according to Alfraganus, that the largest of all bodies is the Sun, and the smallest is Mercury, with the exception of generable and corruptible things. Regarding the distances of these bodies from the Earth, Alfraganus says that the closest distance of the Moon from the Earth is 33 times the Earth's semi-diameter and 2/20 of it, which will be 104,120 miles. And the longest distance of the Moon, which is the closest distance of Mercury, is 64 times the Earth's semi-diameter and 7/6 of it, which is 208,542 miles. And the longest distance of Mercury, which is the closest distance of Venus, is 167 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 542,750 miles. And the longest distance of Venus, which is the closest distance of the Sun, is 1120 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 3,640,000 miles. And the longest distance of the Sun, which is the closest distance of Mars, is 1220 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 3,965,000 miles. And the longest distance of Mars, which is the closest distance of Jupiter, is 8876 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 28,847,000 miles. And the longest distance of Jupiter, which is the closest distance of Saturn, is 14,405 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 46,862,500 miles. And the longest distance of Saturn, which is equal to the distance of the fixed stars, and the quantity of the semi-diameter of the circle of the signs, is 20,110 times the Earth's semi-diameter, which is 65,357,500 miles. And when this is doubled, the quantity of the entire diameter of the circle of the signs, i.e., the eighth sphere, will be 130,715,000 miles. And when this is multiplied by 3 and 1/7, the quantity of the circumference of the circle of the signs, or of any other larger circle described in the eighth sphere, will be 410,818,570 miles. And the measure of each degree of the greater circle will be 1,141,160 miles. Regarding the order of the planets: Here he sets the order of the planets in the conception of children, namely, the order in governing the fetus as long as it is in the mother's womb. He says that Saturn governs it from the hour of conception until the end of one month. In the second month, Jupiter governs it. In the third, Mars. In the fourth, the Sun. In the fifth, Venus. In the sixth, Mercury. In the seventh, the Moon. And because of this, as he says, the child in the seventh month seeks to exit, because the operations of all the planets are completed in him; and those who are born then can live for the same reason. Then the governance returns to Saturn, and he governs it in the eighth month; and then those who are born do not live because of the malice of Saturn. Then Jupiter governs it in the ninth month; and then they commonly are born and live because of the goodness of Jupiter. Then he sets the order of the planets in the governance of the body after birth, as to the progression in ages; and he says that the Moon begins to rule the native from its entry into the world, and rules it for four years, which are the years of nourishment. Then Mercury rules it for ten years. Then Venus for eight. Then the Sun for nine. Then Mars for 15. After this, Jupiter for 12. Then Saturn until the end of life. The Dragon's Head has the nature of the Tail. Here he sets the nature of the Head and Tail of the Dragon.

[Planetary Day and Hour Rulers]
If there is any day. Here he sets the order of the planets as to the lords of days and hours. He says that if a day belongs to a planet, the first hour of that day, according to which the first hour begins from the rising of the Sun, belongs to that planet. And the second hour belongs to the planet that succeeds in the order of the heavens, descending. And the third to the third planet in order, and so on in order until the end of the 12 hours of the artificial day. And that planet to which the 12th hour belongs is the lord of that night. And to whom the 25th hour, i.e., the first hour of the following day, belongs, that is the following day. And the author gives an example in the text, so it is not necessary for me to give it. And thus the exposition of the second difference of this book is completed. And because, God willing, the third difference of this book, in which the author determines the being of the planets in themselves and their being in relation to each other, namely, one to another. And he divides it into two parts: because in the first he determines their being in themselves. In the second part, their being in relation to each other. The second is there: "Regarding their being in relation to each other." And he divides that into two: because first he determines the being of the five planets with respect to the luminaries. Second, their being among themselves. The second is there: "But first he determines their being in themselves." And the meaning of the text is this: Planets are sometimes said to be ascending and sometimes descending, and sometimes they are said to be increased in light and magnitude, and sometimes diminished in light and magnitude. And sometimes they are said to be increased in number, and sometimes diminished in number. And sometimes they are said to be increased in motion, and sometimes diminished in motion. And all planets except the Sun are said to be five northern and five southern. And they are said to be ascending and descending in the north and south. These are the things that happen to the planets in themselves. And the author explains these in order in the text, saying that a planet that ascends in its eccentric circle, so that it is in the upper part of its eccentric, not distant from the apogee by 90 degrees before or after, then its light appears less, and it also appears smaller in quantity, and its course is then slow as to the motion of the center of the epicycle. It is then said to be stronger. But when it is at one of the middle longitudes of its eccentric, i.e., distant from the apogee by exactly 90 degrees, then it is equal in light and magnitude and course, i.e., it is not said to be large or small in light or magnitude, and the motion of the center of the epicycle is equal to its mean motion. But when it is outside these places, namely, distant from the apogee by more than 90 degrees before or after, then it descends and appears greater in light and magnitude, and the center of the epicycle then moves faster than its mean motion. And when the equated argument of the planet is less than 180 degrees, namely, when the equation of the argument is added to the mean motion, then it is said to be increased in number. And if the equated argument is more than 180 degrees, i.e., when the equation of the argument is subtracted from the mean motion, then it is said to be diminished in number. But in the Moon, when the equation is added, it is said to be increased in number; when it is subtracted, it is said to be diminished in number. And when any of the three superior planets moves

[Planetary Motion and Latitude]
When a planet moves with more than its mean motion, it is called augmented motion. When it moves with less than its mean motion, it is called diminished motion. The same applies to the Sun and Moon. When it moves exactly with its mean motion, it is called equal motion. When Venus or Mercury moves faster than the Sun, it is called augmented motion; when slower, it is called diminished motion. When any of the six planets crosses the node of intersection of its deferent with the ecliptic, which node is called the ascending node, it is northern and ascending, meaning it increases in latitude until it is 90 degrees from the intersection. When it is more than 90 degrees from the intersection, it is northern and descending, meaning it decreases in latitude until it is 180 degrees from the intersection, and then it is at the opposite intersection of the first and has no latitude, meaning it is in the ecliptic. When it crosses that, its latitude becomes southern, and it is southern and descending until it is 270 degrees from the first intersection. When it crosses this number, it is southern and ascending until it returns to the first intersection where its latitude will be zero. This is the meaning of the letter regarding the state of the planets in themselves. Their state relative to each other will be discussed and determined later. First, it determined the state of the planets in themselves, then the state of the five planets with respect to the luminaries. And it is divided into four parts according to the four states that the planets have with respect to the Sun and Moon. The first is face-to-face vision. The second is security. The third is combustion. The fourth is oriental and occidental. Therefore, it first determines face-to-face vision. Second, security. Third, combustion. Fourth, oriental and occidental. The first part is in the first. The second begins there: and from this guidance. The third there: and every planet. The fourth there: and from which the higher ones. The meaning of the first part is: When any planet is occidental to the Sun, that is, it rises after the Sun's rising, and there are as many signs between it and the Sun as there are between the house of that planet and Leo, which is the house of the Sun, such a planet is said to be in face-to-face vision with the Sun. For example: Capricorn is the house of Saturn and is the sixth sign from the house of the Sun, that is, Leo. Therefore, when Saturn is in the sixth sign from the Sun, counting the number of signs from the Sun towards Saturn according to the order of the signs (otherwise it would not be occidental if not counted in this way), then it is said to see it face-to-face. And the sign of Sagittarius is the fifth from Leo. Therefore, when Jupiter is in the fifth sign from the Sun, starting from the Sun towards Jupiter according to the order of the signs, it is said to see it face-to-face, and so on for others. And when any planet is oriental to the Moon, and there are as many signs between it and the Moon according to the order of the signs as there are between the house of that planet and the house of the Moon, that is, Cancer, then it is said to be in its face-to-face vision. For example: Cancer is the sixth sign from another house of Saturn, that is, Aquarius. Thus, when the Moon and Saturn are in the sixth sign, there is face-to-face vision between them. And also Cancer is the fifth sign from the house of Jupiter, that is, Pisces. Thus, when the Moon is in the fifth sign from Jupiter according to the order of the signs, there is face-to-face vision between them, and so on for others in their own way you can exemplify. From this, the guidance of the planet. Here it is determined concerning the second state of the five planets with respect to the luminaries, that is, concerning guidance, which is the same as security. And the meaning is this: when any planet is in its own term and in one of the angular houses (the ascendant, or the 10th, or the 7th, or the 4th house), and one of the luminaries is in one of the angular houses from that planet, so that the planet is oriental to the Sun by day and occidental to the Moon by night. This means that by day it is in the 10th sign from the Sun, for then it is in an angle from the Sun and oriental. Or by night it is in the 4th sign from the Moon, for then it is in an angle from the Moon and occidental. Then it is said to be in its guidance. The angle of opposition does not apply here. The reason is that a planet existing in opposition to the Sun or Moon is neither oriental nor occidental. Afterwards, it says that every planet, from the time it is hidden beneath the Sun's rays until the time it begins to appear, is called combust. And it begins to be combust when it begins to enter the rays. And when it comes near the Sun, within 12 degrees, it is called oppressed. When it is with the Sun in the same degree, and there is less than the Sun's semidiameter between them, and with this the planet's latitude is less than the Sun's semidiameter, it is said to be united or incorporated with the Sun. And when it has passed this union, it is said to be in convalescence until it is freed from the Sun's rays. From which the three higher ones appear. Here it determines the oriental and occidental nature of the planets. It says that the three superior planets, when they emerge from beneath the Sun's rays and begin to appear in the morning before the Sun's rising until they come to the opposition of the Sun, this means that they are closer to the eastern horizon circle than to the western. When the Sun is in the line of midnight, then they are called oriental and dexter. They are called oriental because they rise before the Sun, and they are called dexter because they are in the right part of the sky from the Sun. For the western part is right and the eastern is left. For if a man turns his face towards the south, it is clear that the east is to his left and the west to his right. And when any of the three superior planets has passed the opposition of the Sun, it is called occidental sinister. It is called occidental not because it is in the western part of the sky from the Sun, but the opposite is true. But it is called occidental because it sets after the Sun. And it is called sinister because it is in the eastern part of the sky from the Sun, which is left as stated. Venus and Mercury, each of them, within the time in which it circuits its epicycle, conjoins the Sun twice. Once by direct motion, that is, in the superior part of the epicycle. Another time by retrogradation, that is, in the inferior part of the epicycle. Therefore, when any of them separates from the conjunction of the Sun in the middle of retrogradation, that is, in the inferior part of the epicycle, it recedes from the Sun towards the western part of the sky. And when it has moved away from the Sun as much as it can be seen, it is seen in the morning before the Sun's rising. Therefore, then it is called oriental dexter until it is combust by the Sun, that is, until it joins the Sun in the superior part of the epicycle by direct motion. And when it has separated from the Sun by direct motion, it is seen in the evening after the Sun's setting. Therefore, then it is called occidental sinister until it is again combust. And there is a difference between Venus and Mercury and the three superior planets. For Venus and Mercury, sometimes in their recession from the Sun, or in their emergence from beneath the rays, they are oriental, and when they emerge from beneath the rays, they are occidental. But the superior planets, always when they emerge from beneath the Sun's rays, are oriental. And they are said to increase in magnitude until they are 30 degrees from the Sun. And from 30 to 60, they are called strong. And after 1

[Planetary States and Interactions]
When they are elongated from the Sun beyond 60 degrees, they are called oriental, going to debility until the beginning of retrogradation. And from the beginning of retrogradation until the opposition of the Sun, they are called oriental retrograde. And from the opposition until direct motion, they are called occidental retrograde. And from direct motion until 30 degrees after direct motion, they are called occidental strong. And from 30 degrees after direct motion until they come within 30 degrees of the Sun, they are called occidental, going to debility. And afterwards, they are called occidental weak until they are combust. Venus and Mercury, when they separate from the Sun by retrogradation, become oriental and are called weak until they come to direct motion; and from direct motion until they are elongated from the Sun as much as they usually are at the beginning of retrogradation, they are called oriental strong. Then they become weak oriental until they are oppressed under the Sun's rays; and afterwards, they are called united with the Sun; then combust, going to appearance; and from their appearance until their elongation from the superior part of the epicycle by 60 degrees, they are occidental strong; and from this place until retrogradation, they are occidental, going to debility; and afterwards until conjunction, they are occidental weak. If you do not understand this, it is false, since it is not possible for them to be elongated from the Sun up to 60 degrees in the zodiac. Afterwards, it says that when a planet emerges from under the Sun's rays and is not conjoined to any other body or aspect, it is in its own light. This is about their interactions with each other. Previously, it discussed what happens to planets in themselves and what happens to planets in relation to the luminaries. Here, it determines what happens to the seven planets in relation to each other. And it can be divided into as many parts as there are modes of interaction that happen to planets with each other. And it can be reduced to 16 modes according to the meaning of the text, which are: conjunction, void of course, swiftness, slowness, translation of light, return of light, prohibition, pulsation of nature, reception, return of nature, refranation, frustration, cutting off of light, veneration, destruction, obsession, love, and hatred. The author explains these in the text in order until the end of this difference. The meaning of the first part is this: Conjunction is when two planets are in two signs that aspect each other with some aspect, and the lighter (i.e., faster in motion) of them has passed fewer degrees from its sign than the heavier (i.e., slower in motion) from its sign, so that this difference is 6 degrees or less. And then it is said that the lighter goes to the conjunction of the heavier. For example: I assume that the Sun is in Aries and has passed 6 degrees from Aries, and Mars is in Leo and has passed 12 degrees from it. These two signs aspect each other with a trine aspect. And the Sun, which is faster in motion than Mars, has passed fewer degrees from Aries than Mars from Leo, and they are within a difference of 6 degrees. In the proposed example, the Sun goes to the conjunction of Mars by trine aspect. And if the Sun were in the 12th degree of Aries, and Mars in the 12th degree of Leo, then the conjunction would be complete. And if the Sun were beyond the 12th degree of Aries, with Mars existing in the 12th of Leo, then there would be a separation between them. And this is called a conjunction of longitude. Conjunction of latitude, however, is when two planets are in one sign, corporally conjoined, and are of equal latitude from the ecliptic, so that the latitude of one is ascending to the north and the other descending to the north, or one ascending to the south and the other descending to the south. Or if there is a conjunction from some aspect, and the latitude of one is northern ascending, and the other southern ascending. For example: I assume that the Moon is conjoined to Saturn in some sign, and in some degree and minute of it, so that Saturn is near its genzabar, going north in latitude, and its latitude is 3 minutes, and the Moon approaches the Dragon's Tail, coming from the north, decreasing its latitude, so that its latitude is similarly 3 minutes. This is a very true conjunction as to longitude and latitude. And in this case, the Moon would eclipse Saturn, unless the diversity of the Moon's aspect were so great as to impede it. Although the author says that the latitude of one should be ascending and the other descending, it seems to me that in a corporal conjunction, in every case where it can happen that the latitudes of both are equal to the same part (I mean that both latitudes are northern or both southern), there will be a true conjunction of latitudes; and in an opposition aspect, if the latitudes are equal in different parts, so that one is southern and the other northern, there will be a true aspect as to latitudes. And when one planet separates from another. Here it places void of course. It says that when a planet has been conjoined to another by body or aspect, and after separating from it, it does not conjoin to any other by body or aspect as long as it is in that sign, then it is said to be void of course. For example: I assume that the Moon joins Jupiter corporally in Sagittarius; and after its separation from Jupiter, there is no other planet in Sagittarius to which it can be conjoined, nor the rays of any other that it can aspect. In this case, the Moon is void of course until it leaves Sagittarius and joins another by body or aspect. And if a planet is in some sign. It says that when a planet is in some sign where no other planet is, nor the rays of any other, that planet, as long as it remains in that sign in such a state, is said to be feral, or wild, in the likeness of a man having no society with anyone. And when it has separated. It says that when a faster-moving planet has separated itself from a slower-moving planet, and in separating from it, it joins another, then it transfers the nature of the first to the second. For example: I assume that the Moon separates from a corporal conjunction of Jupiter; and before the separation is complete, it conjoins Saturn by some aspect, or corporally. The Moon then transfers the nature of Jupiter to Saturn. Translation also occurs in another way, namely, when a light planet conjoins a heavier one, and that heavier one conjoins another still heavier one, then the middle one transfers the nature of the light one to the heavier one. For example: I assume that the Moon aspects Jupiter with some aspect, and Jupiter aspects Saturn. Jupiter in this case transfers the nature of the Moon to Saturn. But if it does not conjoin two planets. It says that when they are in this way...

[Return of Light]
Suppose that one of them is not joined to the other, but both are joined to some third planet. Then, if that third planet aspects some place in the circle, it projects the light of those two to that place. And if any planet is in the place of its rays, it returns to it the light of those two. For example, I assume that the Sun is in Capricorn and Venus in Pisces, so that they do not aspect each other. Then I assume that Mars is in Cancer, aspecting the Sun by opposition and Venus by trine. In this case, Mars receives the light of the Sun and Venus, and returns their lights to the places of the circle where the rays of Mars are. This is called the return of light. The return of light also occurs in another way when two planets do not aspect each other, but a third planet transfers the light of one to the other, so that it separates from one and joins the other. Then it is the same as translation. Next follows prohibition. It says when three planets are in one sign, but in different degrees, and the one that is slower in motion has traversed more degrees of that sign than either of the other two, then the middle one prohibits the conjunction of the lighter with the heavier. For example, I assume that Saturn is in the 12th degree of Virgo, and I assume that Mars is in the 5th degree of the same Virgo. In this case, Mars seeks the conjunction of Saturn. But I assume that the Moon is in the 8th degree of the same Virgo. In this case, it would not be judged that Mars would be conjoined to Saturn, because the Moon is in the middle and prohibits its conjunction. Prohibition also occurs in another way: so that two planets are in one sign and the lighter one joins the heavier one, and another planet aspects the same heavier one, and its aspect is as close as the bodily conjunction of the other. Then the one that is corporally joined prohibits the aspecting planet from aspecting. And if in this case one of them is closer than the other, the one that is closer obtains and is said to join the heavier. For example, I assume that Saturn is in the 12th degree of Virgo, and Mars in the 8th degree of the same. And I assume that Jupiter projects its rays to the 8th degree of Virgo. In this case, Mars prohibits the aspect of Jupiter. But if Jupiter projected its rays to the 9th degree, it would be judged that Jupiter would aspect Saturn, and with this, it would prohibit the conjunction of Mars. And if Jupiter projected its rays to the 7th degree, it would be judged that Mars would be joined to Saturn, and with this, it would prohibit the aspect of Jupiter. And if a planet joins the lord of that sign, it says when any planet is joined by aspect to the lord of that sign in which it is, or to the lord of exaltation, or triplicity, or term, or face, it is said to send the nature of the lord of that dignity to the one whose dignity it is. For example, I assume that the Sun is in Capricorn, aspecting Saturn existing in Virgo. In this case, the Sun is in the house of Saturn and sends the nature of Saturn itself to Saturn. And if a light planet is in some place where it has some dignity, for example, that it is its house or exaltation, etc., and it aspects some heavier planet that has no dignity in its place, it says the light one sends its strength to the heavier. For example, I assume that the Moon is in Taurus, that is, in its exaltation, and aspects Saturn existing in Virgo by trine. In this case, the Moon sends its nature, which is virtue, to Saturn itself, although Saturn has no dignity in the place of the Moon. But if Saturn has dignity in the place of the Moon, for example, I assume that the Moon is in the 24th degree of Taurus, in its exaltation and in the term and face of Saturn, and aspects Saturn, it sends its own nature and the nature of Saturn by reason of its term and face. And when there are some of its dignities, it says a lighter planet aspects a heavier one, and the lighter one has dignity in the place where it is, and the one it aspects also has some dignity there, then the light one sends both natures to the heavier, that is, its own and that of the one it aspects. And this sending is called reception. For example, I assume that the Sun is in Aries in its exaltation and in the house of Mars, and aspects Mars by some aspect. In this case, the Sun sends its own nature to Mars, and with this, the nature of Mars by reason of its house, and Mars receives the Sun from its house. And if it happens that the inferior is in the dignity of the superior, and the superior in the dignity of the inferior, that is the best reception that can be. For example, let the Sun be in Aries in the house of Mars, and Mars in Leo in the house of the Sun, and the Sun aspects Mars by a trine aspect. Such reception is complete and perfect. Hence follows the return. Here it is affirmed that the planet that aspects the one it aspects is combust under the rays, or retrograde. In this case, the superior returns to the inferior the virtue it sent to it, because due to its weakness it cannot retain it. And if in such a case both are in an angle or in a succedent house, then the return is with profit. And if the inferior is in an angle and the superior is not, so that the superior receives the inferior, such a return is also with profit. And if the inferior is cadent from an angle and the superior is in an angle, the return is with profit. And if both are cadent, the return is with detriment. For example, I assume that the Moon is in Taurus and aspects Mercury existing in Capricorn, combust. In this case, the Moon sends its nature to Mercury. But because Mercury is combust, it cannot retain the nature sent to it, and returns that light which it receives from it. And if in this case both are in angles, the return is profitable, etc. Next follows almuten. It wants to join the superior, but before the conjunction is completed, the inferior becomes retrograde. This is called refranation. For example, I assume that Saturn is in the 2nd degree of Virgo, and Venus is at the beginning of Virgo, going to the conjunction of Saturn. But when Venus reaches the 8th or 9th degree, that is, before it reaches Saturn, it begins to retrograde. In such a case, Venus is refranated so that it does not join Saturn. And understand the same for an aspect if it were going to an aspect, but before the aspect was completed, it began to retrograde. Next follows alchoborad, that is, contrariety. It says that contrariety is when three planets are in one sign, of which one is heavy, and the other two are light, so that one of the two light ones has passed the heavy one, and the other seeks the conjunction of the heavy one. But before it joins the heavy one, the one that has passed the heavy one becomes retrograde, and joins the heavy one by retrogradation, and meets the other light one, and being retrograde, it destroys the conjunction of the one it meets with the heavy one. For example, I assume that Saturn is in the 8th degree of Virgo, and Mars is in the 12th degree of the same, and Jupiter is at the beginning of Virgo, seeking the conjunction of Saturn. But before it joins it, Mars begins to retrograde and joins Saturn by retrogradation and meets Jupiter.

[Frustration and Abscission of Light]
In this case, Mars destroys the conjunction of Jupiter with Saturn. This is followed by 'alphariz', that is, frustration. Frustration is when a light planet seeks a conjunction with a heavy planet, but before the conjunction is completed, the heavy planet enters another sign, and there are rays of some other planet at the beginning of that sign. Then, when the light planet, wanting to conjoin with the heavy one, enters that sign, it conjoins with the rays of that planet aspecting there, and thus the first conjunction is annulled. For example, I assume that Saturn is in the 29th degree of Leo, and Mars is in the 24th degree of the same sign, seeking a conjunction with Saturn. But before Mars conjoins Saturn, Saturn enters Virgo, and I assume that Jupiter aspects the first degree of Virgo. In this case, Mars, leaving Leo, conjoins with the rays of Jupiter, and thus the conjunction of Mars and Saturn is annulled. This is also followed by the abscission of light. It is said that the abscission of light occurs when a light planet seeks a conjunction with a heavy planet, and in the second sign from the heavy planet's sign, there is another planet. But before the light planet can conjoin with the heavy one, the planet in the second sign becomes retrograde and conjoins with the heavy one. In such a case, the retrograde planet cuts off the light of the heavy planet from the planet that wanted to conjoin with it. This is almost the same as 'prietas', but it differs in this: in 'prietas', the retrograde planet not only conjoins with the heavy one but also conjoins with the light one that wanted to conjoin with the heavy one by opposition, and it can be exemplified as was said there. Abscission of light also occurs in another way, namely, when a light planet seeks a conjunction with a heavy planet, and that heavy planet seeks a conjunction with another heavier planet and conjoins with it before the light planet conjoins with the first heavy one. For example, I assume that Mars seeks a conjunction with Jupiter, and Jupiter seeks a conjunction with Saturn, and before Mars conjoins Jupiter, Jupiter conjoins Saturn. In such a case, Saturn cuts off the light of Jupiter from Mars. There are also these planets. Planets are strengthened and in some places weakened, and in some places they become fortunate, and in some places unfortunate. They become fortunate in a sextile or trine aspect of benefics, and they are fortunate when they are cadent from them, according to what is to be understood: that when any planet is in the same sign as another, or in the fourth, seventh, or tenth from it, it is said to be in an angle from it. And if it is in the second sign from it, or in the fifth, eighth, or eleventh, it is said to be in a succedent from it. And if it is in the third sign from it, or in the sixth, ninth, or twelfth, it is said to be cadent from it. They also become fortunate when they separate from one benefic and conjoin with another, or when they are between the rays of two benefics, and this is called 'veneratio' by some. They also become fortunate when they are united with the Sun in the same degree, or when they are in its trine or sextile aspect, or in the trine or sextile aspect of the Moon, and also when they are increased in number and light, and when they are in any of their dignities or in their hayz. And planets become stronger when they ascend in the circle of their apogee, and when they are northern or ascend in the north. Similarly, they are strengthened when they are in the second station, going direct. Similarly, when they emerge from under the Sun's rays, when they are in angles or succedents. And the three superior planets are strengthened when they are oriental. And if they aspect the Sun with a sextile aspect, their strength increases. Similarly, when they are in masculine quarters or in masculine signs. The strength of the Sun also increases in masculine quarters and in masculine signs, except in Libra. For there it is not strengthened because of its fall from exaltation, even though Libra is a masculine sign and also in a masculine quarter. And the three inferior planets, namely those existing below the Sun, are strengthened when they are occidental to the Sun and in feminine quarters and in feminine signs. And the Moon is strengthened when it is above the earth at night, and below the earth during the day, and when it is in a feminine sign and place, and when it is in the exaltation of the Sun, namely in Aries. Regarding the misfortune of planets, know that planets are unfortunate, that is, they are made unfortunate, when they are in the aspects of malefics, and when they conjoin with malefics by body or by aspect, so that between them and the body of the malefic, or between them and the rays of the malefic, there is less than the term of one planet. And they are made unfortunate when they are in the terms of malefics or in the houses of malefics. For example, Jupiter or Venus is made unfortunate in the terms of Saturn and Mars, and in their houses. And they are made unfortunate when malefics are elevated above them, so that the malefics are in the tenth or eleventh sign from them. According to what is to be understood, a planet existing in the tenth sign from another is said to be elevated above it, just as one existing in the tenth house is elevated above the ascendant; and if this happens without reception, it is worse. For example, I assume that Jupiter is at the beginning of Sagittarius and Saturn is at the beginning of Virgo. In this case, Saturn is elevated above Jupiter. For Virgo is the tenth sign from Sagittarius. They are also made unfortunate when they are in conjunction with the Sun, or in opposition to the Sun, or in its quartile aspect. They are also made unfortunate when they are in the heads of their 'genzabar', that is, in the intersections of their deferents with the ecliptic, whether in the head or tail of the dragon, or near these places by 12 degrees or less, especially if in these places the Moon is impeded by them, or the Sun, that is, if the Moon or Sun conjoins them in these places or aspects them with a hostile aspect. The reason why they are made unfortunate in these places is because they can be eclipsed there. They are also made unfortunate when they are distant from the Sun by four degrees before or behind. And when they are between the bodies or rays of two malefics, so that they separate from one malefic body or aspect and conjoin with another malefic; or if a malefic or its rays are in the sign before it, and another malefic or its rays are in the sign after it. Then it is said to be besieged. For example, I assume that Jupiter is in Virgo and in the second degree, and Mars or the rays of Mars are in the tenth degree of the same sign, and Saturn or Mars are in the twelfth degree of the same sign. In this case, Jupiter would be said to be besieged by two malefics. In the same way, it is said of signs that they are besieged when one malefic is at its beginning and another at its end. But if the Sun, as a benefic, aspects a besieged planet or sign with a sextile or trine aspect, so that the aspect is within 7 degrees or less, then by such an aspect the siege is resolved. They are also made unfortunate when they are retrograde or combust or cadent from angles. And they are weakened when they are slow in course, so that they move less than their mean motion. And when they are in the first station, going to retrogradation; or when they are in dark degrees; or masculine planets in feminine signs or degrees, and during the day below the earth and at night above the earth; or feminine planets in masculine signs and in degrees.

[Debilitation of Planets]
Masculine planets are debilitated when they are above the earth during the day and below the earth at night. This is contrary to their nature and similarity. They are debilitated or unfortunate if they are in places opposite to their dignities, or if they are in southern latitude from the ecliptic, especially if they are descending in the same latitude, or if they are in via combusta (from the middle of Libra to the middle of Scorpio), or if they are conjoined with a retrograde planet, or a falling planet, or if they are not received. The three superior planets (Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars) are debilitated when they are occidental to the Sun, or in feminine quarters. The Sun is debilitated in feminine signs and quarters, unless it is in the ninth house, which it enjoys. The three inferior planets (Venus, Mercury, and the Moon) are debilitated in masculine signs and quarters. It is said of the planets that some of them love each other, and some hate each other, as will be shown below. Thus is completed the exposition of the third difference of Alchabitius's Introduction to Judgment. The fourth difference is the exposition of the names of astrologers. In the differences of this book, the author determined the essential and accidental being of the circle of signs in the first difference, and the natures of the seven planets in this difference, and what happens to the seven planets in themselves and to each other in the third difference. The fourth difference follows, in which he explains the names used by the masters of judgments and teaches how to apply them to practice. This entire difference can be divided into 16 parts, according to the 16 chapters he places in it. In the first chapter, he speaks of the great conjunctions, enumerating them. In the second chapter, he teaches how to investigate the ascending degree of a nativity. In the third chapter, he teaches how to choose the place of life in nativities. In the fourth chapter, he teaches how to choose the giver of years of life in nativities. In the fifth, he teaches how to choose the planet ruling the nativity, which presides over the native after hyleg and alcochoden. In the sixth, he treats the perfection of the years of the nativity and the world. In the seventh chapter, he teaches how to direct any significator to any place of the circle. In the eighth, he teaches how to direct the ascending degree in nativities. In the ninth, he teaches how to find the duodenaries of the planets and houses. In the tenth, he teaches how to find the novenaries. In the eleventh, he teaches how to find the decans. In the twelfth, he teaches how to find the half-orbits or hours. In the thirteenth, he teaches how to find the years of the firdaria in nativities. In the fourteenth, he teaches how to know which planet is elevated above another. In the fifteenth, he teaches how to find when the opening of the gates occurs. In the sixteenth, he speaks of fortunate and unfortunate men, where the beginning will be evident in the text. Therefore, in the first chapter, he speaks generally of the great conjunctions, saying that great conjunctions are things signifying destructions or changes that occur in the world, and there are six in number. The first, greater than all conjunctions, is the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn at the beginning of Aries, and this occurs once every 960 years. The second conjunction is the change of the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn from one triplicity to another, and this occurs once every 240 years. And when their conjunction comes to another triplicity, before it occurs twelve times, they conjoin. For example, the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn is now in the airy triplicity and begins in the sign of Gemini in the year of the Lord 1325. From that time, in 20 years (the year of the Lord 1345), they will conjoin in Aquarius, and from that time, in 20 years, they will conjoin in Libra, and then in Gemini, and so on in this order until they conjoin twelve times in these three signs. If you multiply 20 by 12, you will find 240 years, after which the conjunction will change and enter the watery triplicity and remain there similarly for 240 years, and so you should understand for the other triplicities. And understand that just as it is said that the great conjunction returns in 960 years to the beginning of Aries, that is, to the fiery triplicity, a conjunction entering the beginning of any other triplicity does not return to its beginning until after 960 years. It will therefore remain, as stated above, in each triplicity for 240 years. There are four triplicities. Therefore, multiply 240 by four, and you will find 960 years. The third conjunction is of Mars and Saturn in Cancer in any 30 years. The fourth conjunction is of Jupiter and Saturn in whatever sign it may be, and this occurs once every 20 years. The fifth conjunction is the entrance of the great luminary into the first minute of the vernal equinox, that is, Aries. The sixth conjunction is of the Sun and Moon and their opposition. And when the ascendant of a great conjunction is mentioned, it refers to the ascendant, namely, the entrance of the Sun into Aries in that year in which that conjunction is to occur. For example, the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn was in Gemini in the year of the Lord 1325. And the ascendant of the Sun's entrance into Aries in that year was Taurus, 20 degrees. Therefore, Taurus is the ascendant of that conjunction. These conjunctions that have been mentioned are called great conjunctions. There are many other conjunctions among the planets, the number of which is 120, according to Ptolemy in the 50th proposition of the Centiloquium. For he says there, "Do not forget that there are 120 conjunctions that occur in the erratic stars." For in them is greater knowledge than in those that occur in this world, receiving increase and decrease. Daly there in the commentary enumerates them and says that some are binary conjunctions, some ternary, some quaternary, some quinary, some senary, and some septenary. A binary conjunction is when only two planets conjoin, and this can vary in 21 ways. A ternary conjunction is when three planets conjoin, and this can vary in 35 ways. A quaternary conjunction is when four planets conjoin, and this can vary similarly in 35 ways. A quinary conjunction is when five planets conjoin, and this can vary in 21 ways. A senary conjunction is when six planets conjoin, and this can vary in 7 ways. A septenary conjunction is only one, namely, the conjunction of all seven planets. And if you compute or add these predicted numbers to each other, you will find 120. Those who wish to enumerate them individually will find them enumerated in the commentary on the aforementioned proposition. The text here indicates that in this chapter, the author teaches how to investigate the ascending degree of a nativity, assuming that the ascending sign is known but the degree is unknown. He teaches this according to Ptolemy's opinion, not according to his own intention. For Ptolemy says in the 34th proposition of the Centiloquium, "The almuten over the place of conjunction or prevention is in the first degree of the angle from the angles of every human nativity that was in that conjunction or prevention. And every degree that is not similar to the degree of the almuten over the place of conjunction or prevention is not an angle of any human nativity." The meaning of the letter is here.

[Finding the Ascendant for a Nativity]
This is how you find the ascendant degree of someone's nativity. Consider the conjunction of the Sun and Moon that preceded the nativity, or the opposition if an opposition preceded it. If a conjunction preceded it, the nativity is called 'conjunctional'; if an opposition or 'prevention' (which is the same) preceded it, the nativity is called 'preventional'. If the nativity is conjunctional, consider the degree in which the luminaries conjoined, that is, the degree of the zodiac where the conjunction preceding that nativity occurred. See which planet is strongest in that degree by the multitude of testimonies. This planet is the almuten over the place of the conjunction. Then equate it to the hour of the nativity. Once it is equated, establish the ascendant for the hour of the nativity according to estimation, so that you are certain of the ascendant sign. For if you were to err in the sign, this rule would not be valid for you. Therefore, with the ascendant sign of the nativity's hour known, consider whether the place of the planet you equated, given its disposition, is closer to the ascendant degree or to the degree of the tenth house. Whichever of these it is closer to, you will make that angle similar to the planet's degree. That is, place as many degrees of the sign existing in the angle as the planet has traversed of the sign it is in. And so that the meaning of the letter may be more evident, I provide an example here. I assume that at the hour of someone's nativity, the ascendant was Libra, but I do not know its degree. And I assume that the nativity was conjunctional, and the preceding conjunction was in the 6th degree of Aquarius. I see that Saturn is stronger in that degree; therefore, I will equate Saturn to the hour of the nativity, and let us assume I find it in the 20th degree of Virgo. I see that Saturn in this case is closer to the ascendant than to the midheaven according to the estimated ascendant. Therefore, I will make the ascendant angle similar to Saturn's degree. That is, I will place the twentieth degree of Libra in the ascendant. If it had been closer to the midheaven, I would have made the midheaven angle the twentieth degree of the sign existing there. However, if the nativity is preventional, you will work with the degree of the opposition, just as I have now told you about the degree of the conjunction. That is, you will consider the planet that has more strengths in the degree of the opposition. But there is doubt about the degree of prevention, since in a prevention or opposition, the Sun is in one degree and the Moon in the opposite. Which degree, then, should we take as the degree of prevention? The degree of the Sun or the degree of the Moon? The author says, according to Ptolemy's intention, we should take the degree of the luminary that is above the earth. But even then, doubt remains. Suppose one luminary is rising and the other setting, and thus neither will be above the earth nor below the earth. The author says that some wise men have said we should work with the degree of the luminary that is in the east. Then the author says that Ptolemy said if several planets agreed in the lord of the place of conjunction or prevention, that is, if two or three planets had equal strengths in that place, meaning one had as many strengths there as another, then we should take the one that is in its own 'baim'. And if each of them is in its own 'baim', then we should take the one that would change for the better more quickly, that is, the one that will enter a sign where it has more strengths more quickly than in the sign it is currently in. And if they are oriental to the Sun, choose the one that is closer to the Sun, provided it is not combust. In addition to this part, it should be noted that there is another method of investigating the ascendant degree of a nativity, and that method is taken from Ptolemy's Centiloquy, where it says: The place of the Moon in the nativity is the degree itself.

[Duration of Gestation and Hyleg Selection]
The ascendant of the circle at the hour of conception in the womb, from the Moon's place at the hour of conception, is the ascendant at the hour of birth. It is also to be understood, for the clarity of what is to be said, that the durations of infants in their mothers' wombs are not equal, according to what Daly says in the commentary on the opposition already cited. Moreover, they are distinctly divided into three durations: a greater duration, a medium duration, and a lesser duration. The lesser duration contains 258 days. The medium duration contains 273 days. The greater duration contains 288 days. And the difference between the greater and lesser is 30 days. This is to be understood for those born according to the natural course. For abortions and those born in the seventh month, this rule does not hold. The quantity of the infant's duration in the womb is taken from the Moon's place in the figure at the hour of birth. For if at the hour of birth the Moon was at the beginning of the seventh house above the earth, that is, above the western horizon, then the infant was in the mother's womb for the lesser duration, that is, for 258 days. And if the Moon was at the hour of birth in the ascendant degree, then the infant remained in the womb for the medium duration, that is, for 273 days. And if the Moon was at the hour of birth in the degree before the western degree, then the infant remained in the womb for the greater duration, that is, 288 days. And note that when the Moon at birth is in the western part near the horizon, if the astrologer believes it to be above the earth when it is below the earth, or vice versa, he will err in the hour of conception by 30 days. But if the Moon was above the earth, elongated from the west, that is, between the east and west, the duration in the womb is greater than the lesser duration and less than the medium. I say that it is greater than the lesser duration according to the quantity of the Moon's elongation from the west. And if the Moon was below the earth, elongated from the ascendant, the duration in the womb is greater than the medium and less than the greater, and it is greater than the medium according to the quantity of elongation from the ascendant. When you wish to investigate the ascendant degree of someone's birth by this method, establish the ascendant at the hour of birth according to the closest possible estimation to the truth, and equate the Moon to that hour; and see in what place it falls in the figure: if it falls at the beginning of the seventh house, subtract 258 days from the hour of birth. And the hour of conception will remain. But if it falls between the seventh house and the ascendant, that is, above the earth, see by how many degrees it is elongated from the western degree, and for every 12 degrees, take one day, and for every degree beyond 12, take two hours. Add these days and hours to the lesser duration, that is, to 258 days. And subtract the total from the hour of birth, and the time of conception will remain. But if it falls in the ascendant, subtract 273 days from the hour of birth, and the time of conception will remain. But if it falls between the ascendant and the seventh, that is, below the earth, consider how much it is elongated from the ascendant degree, and for every 12 degrees, take one day, and for every remaining degree, two hours. Add the resulting number of days and hours to the medium duration, and subtract the total from the hour of birth. But if the Moon falls at the end of the sixth house, subtract the greater duration from the hour of birth, and the hour of conception will remain. Therefore, knowing the hour of conception, equate the Moon to that hour, and the degree in which it is found was the ascendant at the hour of birth. Although this method is true according to the intention of almost all wise men, it seems to me, and I am certain, that it is not sufficient for investigating the degree in a case where I do not have the ascendant degree except by estimation. For it assumes that I know the Moon's elongation from the western degree or from the ascendant; and if I ignore the ascendant degree, and consequently the western degree, how can I know the Moon's distance from any of them? I do not know. For if my estimation errs by 12 degrees, the Moon's distance from the west or from the ascendant will also err by 12 degrees, and for those, one day should be taken, and thus the hour of conception will err by one day, and the ultimate error, that is, in the ascendant degree, will be as much as the Moon moves in one day. In this chapter, the author teaches how to choose the hyleg, that is, the significator of life in nativities. The meaning of the letter is this: In choosing the significator of life, we must begin with the Sun if the nativity was in the day, and if I find it before the ascendant degree by 5 degrees or less, that is, if we find the Sun in the 5 degrees that have risen above the horizon, that is, at the end of the 12th house, or if we find it in the 10th house or 11th house, we will take the Sun as the hyleg, whether it is in masculine signs or feminine signs. But if it is not in these signs, we must look if it is in the 7th, or 8th, or 9th house in masculine signs, we will still take it as the hyleg. But if in these three places already mentioned, that is, in the 7th house, or 8th, or 9th, it were in feminine signs, it would not be suitable to be the hyleg. Therefore, if the Sun is not a suitable hyleg, we will look to the Moon. If we find it in the ascendant, or in the 2nd, or in the 3rd house, or in the 7th, or 8th house, it will be the hyleg, whether it is in a masculine sign or a feminine sign. But if it is not in these places, we will look if we find it before the degree of the ascendant sign by 5 degrees or less, or in the 10th house, or 4th, or in the 5th in a feminine sign, it will still be the hyleg. But if in these places it were in masculine signs, it would not be a suitable hyleg. But if the nativity was at night, we must begin first with the Moon. If we find it before the western degree by 5 degrees or less, that is, in those 5 degrees that are below the earth on the western side, or in any of the other aforementioned places according to the said manner, it will be the hyleg. And if it is not suitable, we will look to the Sun, which, if it is before the degree of the seventh house by 5 degrees or less, that is, below the earth, or if it is in the 4th or 5th house, it will be a suitable hyleg, whether the signs are masculine or feminine. And if it is in the ascendant or in the 2nd house in a masculine sign, it will be a suitable hyleg, but not in a feminine sign. But if the luminaries are not suitable to be hyleg, we will look whether the conjunction preceded the nativity or the opposition: if the conjunction preceded, we will look at the degree of the conjunction, that is, that degree in which the luminaries were conjoined before the nativity; and if we find that degree in any of the four angles or in any of the succedent houses, we will take it as the hyleg. And if we do not find it in any of the angles nor succedent houses, we must look at the degree of the Part of Fortune, which, if it is in any of the angles or succedent houses, we must take it as the hyleg. But if it is not in any of these places, we must finally take the ascendant degree of the nativity. But if the opposition preceded the nativity, we must look at the degree of the opposition as was said about the degree of the conjunction, and then to the Part of Fortune, and finally to the ascendant degree of the nativity; nor is it necessary in the degree of conjunction or opposition or Part of Fortune to look whether the signs are masculine or feminine. And thus it is clear that the Sun can be hyleg by day and night, above the earth and below the earth, in 11 places. For it can be hyleg above the earth in six places and below the earth in 5. And the Moon can likewise be hyleg in 11 places. For it can be hyleg below the earth in six places and above the earth in 5. But if the Moon in any of the aforementioned places is combust under the Sun's rays, it will not be a suitable hyleg. And when the houses are calculated according to the doctrine handed down in the canons of the astrolabe and the tables of the first mobile, every planet that is before the ascendant or before the beginning of any other house by a few degrees or less will have strong fortitude in the succeeding house. And no place from the aforementioned places can be hyleg unless some planet having dignity in that place aspects it, that is, if it is the lord of the house or the lord of exaltation or triplicity or term or face. Note that the meaning of the letter can be reduced to a few words. There are five places from which the hyleg, that is, the significator of life, is taken, which are these: the Sun, the Moon, the degree of conjunction or opposition, the Part of Fortune, the ascendant degree of the nativity. If the nativity is by day, one must begin with the Sun. And if it is not in suitable places as aforesaid, the Moon is to be taken. And if it is not suitable, the degree of conjunction or opposition is to be taken, which, if it is not suitable, the Part of Fortune is to be taken. And if it is not suitable, the ascendant degree of the nativity is to be taken. Ptolemy says that the hyleg should not be taken from any place existing below the earth. For he says that it is not fitting that we operate in such a noble matter as this through anything that is below the earth, but always through that which ascends and appears above the earth. Nor is it fitting for us to operate through a sign that does not aspect the ascendant.

[Determining the Hyleg and Alcochodon]
nor through the sign that ascends before the ascendant, which is called the house of labor, i.e., the 12th house, which is also cadent from the 7th angle, even more so: because the fumes that rise from the humors of the earth disturb the virtue that comes from it to the earth with their thickness and gloom: and they damage it because the colors and magnitudes of the stars existing in this house appear of a different kind than they are by their nature. Daly Abenragel says that the wise men are very discordant in this; however, that in which the greater part of them agree is that they begin first in diurnal nativities with the Sun, and they begin if it is in any of the angles or succedent, and in a masculine sign, and in a masculine quarter, and if it aspects any of its dignities, it will be the hyleg. If it is not so, and it does not aspect any of its dignities, it will not be suitable for the hyleg; and then you will seek the hyleg from the Moon, and if you find it in an angle or succedent, and in a feminine sign, and in a feminine quarter, and if it aspects any of its dignities, take it for the hyleg, otherwise it will not be suitable. Then look at the nativity; if it is conjunct, take the hyleg from the ascendant degree; and if any lord having any dignity there aspects that degree, you will take him for the hyleg. And if the ascendant is not suitable, you will seek the hyleg from the Part of Fortune. And if the Part of Fortune is not suitable, you will seek the hyleg from the place of the conjunction or opposition preceding the nativity. And if they are not suitable, the nativity will not have a hyleg. And it will be necessary to return to directing the places of the hyleg to the places of the fortunes and to their rays by athazir, and there you will find the place of the end. And if the nativity is nocturnal, you will first seek the hyleg from the Moon, just as you began to seek from the Sun by day. And if you find it in an angle or succedent, in a feminine sign, and in a feminine quarter, and if it aspects any of its dignities, it will be the hyleg. Otherwise, you will seek the hyleg from the Sun, and if you find it in an angle or succedent, in a masculine sign, and in a masculine quarter, and if one having dignity there aspects it, you will take it for the hyleg, otherwise it will not be suitable. And then if the nativity is preventional, you will seek the hyleg from the Part of Fortune, just as you sought from the Moon and the Sun. And if the Part of Fortune is not suitable, you will seek the hyleg from the ascendant degree. And if none of them is suitable for the hyleg, you will seek the hyleg from the degree of conjunction or prevention preceding the nativity. And if it is in an angle or succedent: and there is an aspect from one having any of the five dignities there, take it for the hyleg. And when the Sun is the hyleg and does not have an alcochodon, you will seek the hyleg from the degree of the Moon. And if that, i.e., the degree of the Moon, is the hyleg and does not have an alcochodon, you will seek the hyleg from the ascendant degree if the nativity is conjunct; and if that degree is the hyleg and does not have an alcochodon, you will seek the hyleg from the Part of Fortune. However, if the nativity is preventional, begin first with the Part of Fortune: if it is the hyleg and none of these has an alcochodon, you will seek the hyleg from the degree of conjunction or opposition preceding the nativity: and if none of them has an alcochodon, because the native did not have a hyleg nor an alcochodon, it is a signification of a short life and durability. And know that in the hyleg sought from the ascendant and from the Part of Fortune and from the degree of conjunction or prevention, the masculinity or femininity of the signs nor of the quarters is not considered. And the greater part of the wise men say that the Moon in the third house is suitable to be the hyleg: because it rejoices in it, and they similarly say that the Sun in the ninth house is suitable to be the hyleg because it rejoices there. The alcochodon. In this chapter, the author teaches how to choose the alcochodon, who is the giver of the years of life. The meaning of the letter is this: when you want to know which of the planets is the giver of the years of life, we must look at which planet has more dignities or strengths in the place of the hyleg. For example: if the Sun is the hyleg, we must look at the stronger planet in the place of the Sun. And if the Moon is the hyleg, we must look at the stronger in the place of the Moon, and so on for other places. And if such a planet aspects the place of the hyleg from any aspect, we must take it as the alcochodon. If, however, it does not aspect, we must look at another after it, i.e., the planet that has some strengths in the place of the hyleg, but not as many as the first degree. For example: if one has six strengths in the place of the hyleg and another has 5 or 4 strengths there, and the first does not aspect the place of the hyleg, it cannot be the alcochodon. Then if the second aspects the place of the hyleg, we must take it as the alcochodon; and if it also does not aspect, we must look again at another having fewer dignities, and so we must proceed: until we find one aspecting the place of the hyleg who has some dignity in the place of the hyleg: and if we find no planet aspecting the place of the hyleg that has dignity or dignities there, that place could not be the hyleg: therefore, in this case, it is necessary to seek another hyleg according to the previously stated method. For example: if the nativity is diurnal and the Sun is in a suitable place to be the hyleg: if no one has dignity in the place of the Sun aspecting it, the Sun cannot be the hyleg: because it does not have an alcochodon: therefore, it is then necessary to seek the hyleg from the Moon. And if it is in a suitable place for the hyleg and no one having dignity in its place aspects it, then seek the hyleg from the Part of Fortune or from the degree of conjunction or prevention or the ascendant degree according to the order stated above. And it seemed to some that one should begin with the lord of the house, so that if the lord of the house of the hyleg aspects the hyleg, they took him as the alcochodon and did not look at any other. But if the lord of the house did not aspect, they looked at the lord of the exaltation, who, if he aspected, they placed him as the alcochodon. And if he did not aspect, they looked at the lord of the triplicity, then at the lord of the term, then and finally at the lord of the face. Dorotheus first looked at the lord of the term and preferred him to the lord of the house: but this does not seem consistent with the truth. And some said that if two or three or more planets agree in dignities so that they have equal essential strengths in the place of the hyleg and all aspect that place, the one who aspects closest is to be taken: and if they also agree in this, which rarely happens, the one who is in a praiseworthy state is to be taken, provided that it is conjunct with the Sun in one degree and is not distant from it by 16 minutes. Or the one who is closer to an angle or the one who is at the beginning of the morning lord, i.e., who begins to appear in the morning before sunrise, or the one who is in its station, standing and going direct, or who is in another praiseworthy state from the Sun, i.e., who is oriental if it is one of the three superior planets or occidental if it is one of the three inferior planets. If, however, it happens that the Sun is the hyleg and is in Leo or Aries, i.e., in its house or exaltation, it will be the hyleg and alcochodon. And if the Moon is the hyleg and is in Cancer or Taurus, it will be the hyleg and alcochodon, and it is not necessary to consider any other. Ptolemy says that he is the alcochodon who has more strengths in the place of the hyleg, whether he aspects that place or not. But none of the wise men agrees with him. Therefore, it seems safer to me to follow the way of the wise men. Regarding the years that the alcochodon gives, although the author says nothing, I want to narrate a few things according to the opinion of Balhy Abenragel, which are more consistent with the truth. Balhy Abenragel says that the greater part of the wise men of this science say that when the alcochodon is in the angles, it gives its greater years; and when in the succedents, it gives its middle years; and when in the cadent houses, it gives its lesser years, and it does not give improvement to one succedent over another, and this is an error, says Balhy Abenragel. Know that among the hidden secrets and signals of this science is that when the alcochodon is in the degree of the tenth house, it gives its greater years. And when it is in the degree of the eleventh house, it gives its middle years. And when it moves from one of these two places to another, look at how many degrees there are from one to the other and divide by them the years that are between the greater years and the middle years. For example: I assume that the degree of the 10th house is the third degree of Pisces: and I assume that Venus is the alcochodon and is in the 12th degree of Pisces: it is therefore distant from the point of the 10th house by 10 degrees. And I assume that from the beginning of the 10th house to the beginning of the 11th are 30 degrees. I know that if it were at the beginning of the 10th house, it would give the greater years, which are 82. And if it were at the beginning of the 11th house, it would give its middle years, which are 45. But now in

[Planetary Conditions and Life Expectancy]
neither of these two points is. Therefore, I will subtract 45 and a half years from the greater years, which are 82. 37 years remain, which I will multiply by the distance of Venus from the beginning of the tenth house, which is 7. This results in 370. I will divide this by 30, which is the length between the tenth and eleventh houses, and 12 years will result, with a remainder of 10 after the division. I will multiply this by 12 and divide by 30, and four months will result. Therefore, I will subtract 12 years and four months from the greater years of Venus, and 69 years and 8 months will remain. These will be the years that Venus gives in this case. You can apply this example to other angles and houses. Balya Abenragel says that when the Alcochoden is combust and it is going towards the Sun so that it does not appear, it loses all its given years. For that which is in this state gives only days or hours or things that have no name. And the term of combustion is this: After Saturn is occidental to the Sun and the Sun is towards it, and there are 15 degrees between them until it remains and is oriental, and there are 10 complete degrees between them. And Jupiter is the same. Mars, however, after there are 15 degrees between it and the Sun in the west, until it is oriental and there are 9 degrees between them. Mercury, however, does its deeds and gives its complete gifts as long as it is direct, provided that it is not approached by the Sun by less than 7 degrees. And from 7 degrees to 5 degrees, it gives, but not completely. But from the beginning of 7 degrees until it passes the Sun by 5 degrees, it loses all its given years. And from 5 degrees until the completion of 7 degrees, it gives little. But after it has passed 7 degrees, it gives its complete given years. And Venus does the same, except that when it appears visibly at less than 5 degrees, it then gives its complete given years. The Moon, however, when it applies to the Sun by going towards it and there are 15 degrees between them, weakens its action and gives a small thing, that is, days or something similar to this. And when it applies to the Sun at 12 degrees, it loses all its given years until it has passed the Sun's degree by 10 degrees, and then it gives a small given, that is, days or something similar to it, until it has passed the Sun by 12 degrees, and then it will give its complete given years. The fall of a planet, which is contrary to its exaltation, takes away half of the given years, and the term of this fall is such that the Sun, when it is in the 5th degree of Libra until it passes the 25th degree of the same, is in its fall. The remainder of the sign will be judged as detriment. Saturn is in its fall from the beginning of the 12th degree of Aries until it passes the 26th degree of the same, and the remainder of the sign will be judged as detriment. Jupiter is in its fall from the 8th degree of Capricorn until the completion of the 20th degree, and the remainder of the sign will be judged as detriment. Mars is in its fall from the beginning of the 19th degree of Cancer until the end of Cancer, and at the beginning of that sign, it is judged as detriment. And Venus is in its fall after it has passed the term of Jupiter until the 21st degree of Virgo. What is said about Venus cannot stand unless you understand it according to Ptolemy's terms. For according to those terms, the 14th degree of Virgo is the end of Jupiter's term. But according to the terms in Alchabitius, it is not so. For there, Jupiter's term ends in the 21st degree of Virgo. Either the text of Balya is corrupt, or his statement cannot be understood except according to Ptolemy's terms. And Mercury is in its fall from the beginning of the 8th degree of Pisces until the completion of the 10th degree of the same, and in the remainder of the same sign, it is judged as if it were in its detriment. The retrogradation of the three superior planets from the beginning of their retrogradation until the opposition of the Sun, that is, until the middle of the retrogradation, takes away half of the given years, and the other half remains. And when it has passed the opposition of the Sun, see how many degrees and minutes it will go retrograde from the opposition of the Sun, and how many there are, see what proportional part it will have to all the degrees it has to retrograde from the opposition until the direction, and add that much to half of the given years, and direct those degrees correctly with their minutes in such a way that the planet that is at the beginning of its direction will give its complete given years correctly. I will give an example here: I assume Mars is the Alcochoden and its total given years are 60, according to the proportion previously made between the angle and the succeeding house, and I assume it is retrograde in the middle of its retrogradation. It has therefore lost half of these years in the middle of its retrogradation and before the middle of its retrogradation, and 30 years remain. And I assume it has gone beyond the middle of its retrogradation, that is, the opposition of the Sun, retrograding by 2 degrees. And I assume that from the opposition until the direction, it should go retrograde by 10 degrees. Therefore, I will multiply 2 degrees by half of the given years that it lost, that is, by 30 years, and 60 will result. I will divide 60 by 10, and 6 years will result. I will add these years to half of the given years, that is, to 30 years, and 36 years will result. This is the given of Mars in the proposed case. In Venus and Mercury, after each of them begins to retrograde, it loses half of the given years that it gives when it is direct. And afterwards, see how many degrees and minutes remain until its occultation, as accurately as you can, because Venus may appear when there are less than 5 degrees between it and the Sun. And when it has appeared, it will give half of the given years, unless it appeared when there were less than 5 degrees between it and the Sun, in which case that appearance does not harm it in this state. Afterwards, direct those degrees and minutes after it began to retrograde until it occults itself subtly and correctly, and divide by this half of the given years that remained in the aforementioned manner. For that which is occulted loses all its given years, as we said, and nothing remains for it. And it can be exemplified in a similar way to the example given for the retrogradation of the three superior planets. Balya says that Jupiter and Venus, when they are corporally conjoined or when they aspect the Alcochoden from a trine or sextile, add to the number of years that the Alcochoden gave according to the number of their own years, months, days, or hours, according to their strengths or weaknesses. And when both malefics, Saturn and Mars, are corporally conjoined with the Alcochoden or aspect it from an opposition or square, they diminish its number of years by their lesser number. But when Mercury is with the benefics, adding to the Alcochoden, it also adds its lesser number of years. And when it is with the malefics, diminishing the Alcochoden, it also diminishes its part. And when Mars and Saturn aspect from a trine in signs of short ascension or from a sextile in signs of long ascension, they diminish. And I say that the Sun in a square and opposition diminishes its lesser number of years, and adds from a trine and sextile. Many ancient and modern astrologers say that a fortunate Moon adds from a trine or sextile. And all the wise men of this science confess that when a native does not have a Hyleg and has one of the two benefics in the ascendant or midheaven, it is possible that he will live according to the quantity of the lesser years of that benefic that signified life, unless the ascending degree and the Moon are unfortunate, or the same benefic is the lord of the house of death, which signifies a short duration and life. And the Almuten who presides over the nativity. This author teaches how to choose the Almuten, that is, the giving planet in the figure from which the native's being begins after the Hyleg and Alcochoden. The meaning of the text is clear.

[Calculating the Perfection of Conjunctions]
But one year for one sign according to the method previously stated: and we will begin from Virgo. And I will give an example, applying it to our computations according to the years of our Lord Jesus Christ. When you wish to know to which sign the year of the conjunction applies, which signified the law of the Saracens, subtract from the years of Christ 621 years, 6 months, and 14 days. For so many years passed from the beginning of the years of Christ until the beginning of the years of the Arabs. And divide the number of perfect years that remain by 12, and cast out what remains from Virgo, giving to each year one sign according to the method previously stated. And the imperfect year following the perfect years you divided remains in Virgo. For example: the years of Christ are now 1330 completed, and 22 days. From these I will subtract 621 years, 6 months, 14 days. There remain 708 perfect years, 6 months, and 8 days. These are the years that have passed from the beginning of the years of the Arabs until now. I will divide these perfect years by 12, and the total number arises so that no perfect year remains. Therefore, I say that the perfection of the great conjunction, which signified the sect of the Saracens, is now in Virgo, according to the author's opinion. Just as an example was given for the sect of the Saracens, so it can be done for other sects, if the sect is to be spoken of, if the conjunction signifying that sect and the ascendant of the year of the conjunction are known. But it is not expedient to speak much on this matter, for it is a thing that does not accord with our faith. But if anyone delights in these things and wishes to reduce the changes that occur in laws to the motions of the superior bodies, let him read the books on great conjunctions; there he will find it. Then he says, if you wish the perfection from the sign of the conjunction that signified the aforesaid sect, cast out the aforesaid years from Scorpio, because that conjunction, according to him, was in Scorpio. But if you wish the perfection from the ascendant of the kingdom, see how many solar years have passed from the beginning of that kingdom. He gives an example of one kingdom, but I do not know of which kingdom he speaks, and I do not care, for the letter can be understood without his example. But just as it is said of the ascendant of the kingdom, so it is to be understood of the ascendant of the foundation of any city or castle or even of any building, so that the perfect solar years that have passed from the beginning of that foundation are taken and cast out from the ascendant of the beginning of the foundation in the manner previously stated. Then he says, if you wish the perfection from the ascendant of the mutation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn from the watery triplicity to the fiery triplicity, subtract from the years of the Persians 176 perfect years, and convert those that remain into solar years, and cast out from Leo. He means that the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn at the beginning of the years of the Persians was in the watery triplicity, and after the beginning of the years of the Persians, by which they computed for 176 years, the conjunction changed to the fiery triplicity. And he orders to subtract 176 years from the years of the Persians, and the years that remain are those that have passed from the year of the mutation of the conjunction to the fiery triplicity. And he orders to convert those remaining years into solar years, because the Persians do not have bissextile years, but solar years do. And the perfection is according to solar years. And he orders to cast out from Leo, because according to him, Leo was the ascendant in the year of the mutation of the conjunction to the fiery triplicity. From this it appears that this author was and composed this book at a time when the conjunction was in the fiery triplicity. But now this conjunction is in the airy triplicity. Therefore, I will give an example of the triplicity in which we are. When you wish to know the perfection from the year of the mutation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn to the airy triplicity, subtract from the years of Christ 1324 years, 71 days, and 20 hours. For so much time has passed from the beginning of the years of Christ until the beginning of the years of the mutation of the conjunction to the triplicity in which we are. And cast out the remainder from the 13th degree of Taurus, for that was the ascendant of the aforesaid year. And where your number reaches, there will be the perfection of the year. For example: the years of Christ are 1330 completed, and 22 days. From these I will subtract 1324 years and 71 days. And there will remain 5 perfect years and 316 days of the imperfect year. I will give the first year to Taurus, beginning from its 13th degree. The second sign to Gemini, beginning from its 13th degree. The third to Cancer. The fourth to Leo, beginning from its 13th degree. The fifth to Virgo, beginning from its 13th degree. Therefore, the perfection of the 6th perfect mundane year comes to Libra, to the 13th degree. And if you wish the degree in which is the perfection of the last day from the days that have passed of the imperfect year, multiply the number of days of the perfect year by 30, and divide the product by 365. And the number of times will be the degrees. But if anything remains after the division, multiply it by 60, and divide by the same as before, and the number of times will be the minutes. For example, in the proposed example, 316 days remained from the imperfect year, which I will multiply by 30, and 9480 will result. I will divide this number by 365, and 25 degrees will result. And 355 remains after the division, which I will multiply by 60, and 21300 will result. And I will divide by 365, and 58 minutes will result. Therefore, I will add to the 13th degree of Libra 25 degrees and 58 minutes, and the number will reach the 8th degree and 58 minutes of Scorpio. Therefore, there is now the perfection from the ascendant of the year of the mutation of the conjunction to the airy triplicity. This is about direction. In this chapter, the author teaches how to direct any significator to any place of the circle. It must first be understood that direction, or directing a significator to any place of the circle, is nothing other than finding the equinoctial degrees that revolve from the place of the significator to the place to which it must be directed. If the place of the significator is in the midheaven or in the angle of the earth, then to direct is to find the equinoctial degrees that revolve from the place of the significator to the place to which it must be directed in the right horizon. But if it is in the ascendant or in the descendant, then it is to find those degrees in the oblique horizon. But if it is not in any of these places, then ascensions are taken mixed, that is, mixing the ascensions of the direct circle with the ascensions of the region, proportionally according to the distance of the place of the significator from the angles. And the degrees of direction signify years, which days, which other times. In nativities, each degree signifies a year. In the revolutions of the years of the world and nativities, each degree signifies a day. And some wish that in the revolutions of years, 59 minutes and 8 seconds, that is, the motion of the sun in one day, signify one day. In the conjunctions of the sun and moon and in oppositions, according to some, each 13 degrees and 10 minutes, that is, as much as the moon moves in a day by its mean course, signifies a day. Therefore, when you wish to direct any significator to any place of the circle, if that significator is in the degree of the midheaven or in the angle of the earth, subtract the ascensions of the direct circle of the degree of the significator from the ascensions of the direct circle of the place to which you wish to direct, and the degrees of direction remain. But if the significator is in the ascendant or descendant, subtract the ascensions of the oblique circle of the degree of the significator from the ascensions of the oblique circle.

[Calculating Directions]
to which you wish to direct it, and the degree of direction remains. Example when it is in the Midheaven: I assume that the Moon is in the Midheaven in the 5th degree of Aquarius, and I assume that the opposite rays of Saturn are in the 6th degree of Pisces. I will assume that I want to direct the Moon to the opposite rays of Saturn. I therefore sought the ascensions of the Moon's degree in the direct circle and found 37 degrees, 23 minutes. I also sought the ascensions of the sixth degree of Pisces, where the opposite rays of Saturn are, in the same direct circle, and found 67 degrees, 48 minutes. Then I subtracted the ascensions of the Moon from the ascensions of Saturn's rays, and 30 degrees, 25 minutes remained. These would be the degrees of direction in this case. Example when it is in the Ascendant: I assume that the Moon is in the same 5th degree of Aquarius and the rays of Saturn in the 6th of Pisces. I sought the ascensions of the Moon's degree in the oblique circle in a region whose latitude is 48 degrees, and I found 90 degrees, 22 minutes. I also sought the ascensions of the sixth degree of Pisces and found 348 degrees, 31 minutes. I subtracted the ascensions of the Moon from the ascensions of the degree of Saturn's rays, and 18 degrees, 9 minutes remained. These would be the degrees of direction in this case. In this same way, the ascending degree is directed to any place in the circle. If, however, the significator to be directed is outside these places, then if it is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant, see its distance from the Midheaven by subtracting the ascensions of the degree of the Midheaven in the direct circle from the ascensions of the degree of the significator, which distance you should keep. Then know half of the diurnal arc of the significator's degree by the method described in the chapter on radiations, and keep it. Then subtract the ascensions of the direct circle of the significator's degree from the ascensions of the direct circle of the place to which you wish to direct it, and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle; keep it. Then subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of the place to which you wish to direct it in the same oblique circle, and what remains is the significator of the region. Then subtract the smaller significator from the larger, and multiply the difference by the distance from the angle of the Midheaven, and divide the product by half of the diurnal arc, and the proportional part will come, which you add to the significator of the direct circle if it is smaller than the significator of the region, or subtract if it is larger, and what results will be the degree of direction. But if you wish to direct against the succession of signs, just as parts and retrograde planets are directed, that is, proceeding from the Ascendant towards the Midheaven, then you must take the distance of the significator from the Ascendant by the ascensions of the region, and you must add the proportional part of the two significators to the significator of the region if it is smaller than the significator of the direct circle, or subtract from it if it is larger; in other respects, the work does not differ. But if the significator to be directed is between the Ascendant and the angle of the Earth, see the distance of the significator's degree from the Ascendant by subtracting the ascensions of the Ascendant's degree of the region from the ascensions of the significator's degree of the region, and keep the distance. Then know half of the nocturnal arc of the significator's degree by the method described in the work on radiations, which you also keep. Then subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree in the oblique circle from the ascensions of the place to which you wish to direct it in the same oblique circle, and what remains is the significator of the region, which you keep. Then subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree of the direct circle from the ascensions of the direct circle of the place to which you wish to direct it, and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle. Then subtract the smaller from the larger, and the difference of the two significators will remain, which you multiply by the distance of the significator's degree from the Ascendant, and divide the product by half of the nocturnal arc of the significator's degree, and the proportional part will come, which you add to the significator of the region if it is smaller than the significator of the direct circle, or subtract from the significator of the region if it is larger than the significator of the direct circle; what results after addition or subtraction will be the degree of direction. If, however, you wish to direct the succession of signs, that is, proceeding from the angle of the Earth towards the Ascendant, then you must take the distance of the significator from the angle of the Earth by the ascensions of the direct circle, and multiply that by the difference of the two significators, and divide by half of the diurnal arc, as was said before; and you must add the proportional part to the significator of the direct circle if it is smaller than the significator of the region, or subtract if it is larger; in other respects, the work does not differ. But if the significator to be directed is between the angle of the Earth and the occidental degree, you must operate with the opposite degree of the significator and with the opposite degree of the place to which you wish to direct it, and by the distance of the opposite degree of the significator from the Midheaven, and by half of the diurnal arc of the opposite degree of the significator. For the opposite degree of the significator is as distant from the meridian line as the significator's degree is from the angle of the Earth, and half of the diurnal arc of the opposite degree is as great as half of the nocturnal arc of the significator. And then the operation is the same as that between the Midheaven and the Ascendant. If, however, the significator to be directed is between the occidental angle and the Midheaven, you must operate similarly by the opposite degree of the significator and by its distance from the Ascendant, and by half of the nocturnal arc of the same opposite degree, and by the opposite degree of the significator's place to which it is to be directed; and the operation is the same as that between the Ascendant and the angle of the Earth. If it happens that the significator to be directed is in one quadrant and the place to which it is to be directed is in another quadrant, for example: the significator is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant, and the place to which it is to be directed is between the Ascendant and the angle of the Earth, then you must direct up to the angle, and afterwards direct the angle up to the place to which it is to be directed, and join these directions together. You will direct the significator as previously stated, so that you take the distance of the significator from the angle that is behind it in the order of the signs; for example, if it is between the angle of the Midheaven and the Ascendant, you will take its distance from the angle of the Midheaven. And if it is between the Ascendant and the angle of the Earth, you will take its distance from the Ascendant. You will also take half of the diurnal or nocturnal arc of the significator's degree or its opposite by the method previously stated; and you will take the angle to which you wish to direct as the place to which it is to be directed; and you will observe the order previously stated. After that direction is made, you will direct the angle, by the method previously stated, which was the significator in one of the angles, up to the place to which the significator is to be directed, and you will add one direction to the other, and the degrees of direction will result. The author in the text says that the distance of the significator from the angle should be taken, and that should be divided by the parts of the hours of the significator's degree, and the hours of the significator's distance from the angle will result. And he says that one must take the sixth part of the difference of the two significators, which part he orders to be multiplied by the hours of the significator's distance from the meridian, and he orders the result to be added to the significator of the direct circle or subtracted by the method stated. But the method I have presented is easier and clearer. For in the author's method, one must take the distance from the angle by the same method that I have presented, and beyond this, one must seek the parts of the hours of the significator's degree.

[Calculating Directions with Latitude]
Then divide the distance from the angle by the parts of the hours of the degrees of the significator, and hold what results. Afterwards, according to his method, seek the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region by the same method I have set forth, and also the difference between the two significators. Beyond this, it is necessary to divide that difference by six so that it has six parts. Since error easily occurs in a multitude of operations, the method I have set forth seems more certain to me. For example, when the significator is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant, and the place to which it should be directed is in the same quadrant, namely between the Midheaven and the Ascendant. I assume that the Moon is the Hyleg and is in the fifth degree of Aquarius, and I assume that the opposite rays of Saturn (the same would apply to bodies) are in the sixth degree of Pisces, and I assume that the angle of the Midheaven is the 20th degree of Capricorn. To direct the Moon to the rays of Saturn, I first sought the ascensions of the degree of the Midheaven in the direct circle and found 21 degrees and 39 minutes. I subtracted the ascensions of the degree of the Midheaven from the ascensions of the degree of the Moon, and the distance of the Moon from the Midheaven remained: 15 degrees and 44 minutes. Then I sought the ascensions of the degree of the Moon in the oblique circle and found 330 degrees and 22 minutes, which I also sought from the ascensions of the degree opposite the Moon's place, 104 degrees and 30 minutes, from which I subtracted the ascensions of the degree of the Moon. But because I could not subtract, since the ascensions of the degree of the Moon were greater than the ascensions of the opposite degree, I added 360 degrees to the ascensions of the degree opposite the Moon, and 464 degrees and 30 minutes resulted. Then I subtracted, and 134 degrees and 8 minutes remained, and this was the entire diurnal arc of the degree of the Moon, which I bisected, and the half was 67 degrees and 4 minutes. Therefore, I kept the distance of the Moon from the Midheaven and half of the Moon's diurnal arc. Then I subtracted the ascensions of the degree of the Moon in the direct circle, which were 37 degrees and 23 minutes, from the ascensions of the degree of Saturn's rays in the same circle, which were 67 degrees and 48 minutes, and 21 degrees and 25 minutes remained, and this was the significator of the direct circle, which I therefore kept. Then I subtracted the ascensions of the degree of the Moon in the oblique circle, which were 330 degrees and 22 minutes, from the ascensions of Saturn's rays in the same oblique circle, which were 348 degrees and 21 minutes, and the significator of the region remained, which was 8 degrees and 9 minutes. Then I subtracted the significator of the region from the significator of the direct circle, and the difference between the two significators remained, which was 12 degrees and 16 minutes. Then I multiplied this difference by the distance of the Moon from the Midheaven and divided by half of the diurnal arc of the degree of the Moon, and the proportional part resulted, which was 2 degrees, 52 minutes, and 38 seconds. I also subtracted this proportional part from the significator of the direct circle because it was greater than the significator of the region, and the degrees of direction remained, which were 27 degrees, 32 minutes, and 21 seconds. For each degree, I took one year, and for every 5 remaining minutes, one month, and for every minute, 6 days, and for every second, 6 minutes of a day. When this time is completed from the time of birth, for whom the figure was thus disposed, the native will die. When the significator is between the Ascendant and the angle of the earth, you will work with the distance from the Ascendant and with half of the nocturnal arc, and it does not differ in anything else. When you wish to direct against the succession of signs, if the significator is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant, you will work with the distance from the Ascendant and with half of the diurnal arc. If the significator is between the angle of the earth and the degree of the West, you will work with the opposite of the degree of the significator and the degree opposite the place to which you wish to direct, and then your work is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant. And if the significator is between the degree of the West and the Midheaven, you will similarly work with the opposite degrees, and then your work is between the Ascendant and the angle of the earth. Note, however, that in the manner described, significators are directed when they have no latitude. When significators have latitude, the method is more difficult, and for this reason, an instrument was made to direct planets having latitude, and that instrument is called a directorium. It seemed to the composer or inventor of that instrument that a significator having latitude could not be directed by tables of ascensions, or not without great difficulty. But I say that his instrument is not sufficient unless it is of maximum size so that it can receive minutes, and such an instrument can hardly be made. For in directions, for the most part, one year is taken for each degree. If, in the directions of the instrument, it is not divided except by degrees, certainty up to a year will hardly be found in it, and this if the instrument is well made so that there is no error in dividing; but this is not sufficient. And I tell you that a significator having latitude can be directed to a place having latitude by tables of ascensions, and I have not seen the method explained in any book. But the method is this: when you wish to direct a significator having latitude from the ecliptic to the body of some planet having latitude, or to the rays of some planet having latitude, first seek the degree with which the significator culminates according to the doctrines of the canons of the primum mobile. Then seek the degree with which the place to which you wish to direct culminates according to the same doctrine, and you will take the degree with which the significator culminates as the place of the significator, and by this, you will know the distance of the significator from the Midheaven or from the Ascendant by the method previously stated, neither more nor less. And you will take the place with which the place to which it should be directed culminates as the place to which it should be directed. With these two, you will seek the significator of the direct circle by the method previously stated. Then seek the degree with which the significator rises in its region according to the doctrine of the canons of the primum mobile. Also seek the degree with which the place to which it should be directed rises according to the same canons. Then, with the degree with which the significator rises, you will seek half of the diurnal or nocturnal arc by the method previously stated, and you will seek the significator of the region with these two degrees, namely with the degree with which the significator rises and with the degree with which the place to which it should be directed rises; in other respects, the work does not differ. I also tell you briefly that it is necessary to seek the degree in which the significator culminates and the degree with which the place to which it should be directed culminates. With the first two, it is necessary to seek the significator of the direct circle. With the other two, it is necessary to seek the significator of the region. With the degree with which the significator culminates, it is necessary to seek the distance from the Midheaven if it is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant. With the degree with which the significator rises, it is necessary to seek half of the diurnal or nocturnal arc. If the significator is between the Ascendant and the angle of the earth, it is necessary to seek the distance of the significator from the Ascendant with the degree with which the significator rises and with the same half of the nocturnal arc. In all other respects, the work is the same as the work previously stated. There is also another case that can occur in directions when the significator and the place to which

[Direction of the Ascendant]
which must be directed by latitudes, or one of them has latitude. For it can happen that the significator to be directed and the place to which it must be directed come simultaneously to the meridian line, so that both mediate the sky with the same degree, but are not in the same degree in the ecliptic. If any of these cases occurs, then you will operate in the same way as I will say. If the significator and the place to which it must be directed come with the same degree to the midheaven, and there are no ascensions in the direct circle between them, you will put 0 for the significator of the direct circle. Afterwards, you will seek the significator of the region by taking the ascensions in the oblique circle from the place with which the significator rises to the place with which the place to which it must be directed rises, and you will multiply all that, that is, the significator of the region, by the distance of the significator from the angle, and you will divide the product by half of the diurnal or nocturnal arc, and the proportional will result, which you will hold for the degrees of direction. But if the significator to be directed and the place to which it must be directed rise with one and the same degree, you will put 0 for the significator of the region, and you will multiply the significator of the direct circle by the distance of the significator from the angle, and divide by half of the diurnal or nocturnal arc, and the proportional will result, which you will hold for the degrees of direction. To give examples of all these would be too long, but I intend, God willing, at the end of this exposition, to put the equation of one nativity in which the method of investigating the ascendant and choosing the hyleg and alcochoden will appear, and I will put there some projections of rays and some directions; let this suffice concerning the work of directions. The author says in the text, having known the years of direction, if you wish to know the place of this direction in the zodiac, add the years of direction to the ascensions of the direct circle of the significator's degrees if the significator was in the midheaven or in the angle of the earth, and reduce to equal degrees in the direct circle; and where the number leads you in the circle of signs, there is the place of direction; and it is called the place of division, and the lord of the term of that place is called the divisor. If the significator was in the ascendant, add the years of direction to the ascensions of the region of the significator's degrees, and reduce to equal degrees in the oblique circle; and where the number leads you in the circle of signs, there is the place of division, and the lord of the term of that place is the divisor. And this is the same work as the work of the projections of rays; and when you have made the direction and you have made this work, you will find at the end the same place to which you directed, unless the significator had latitude. And from this, the algebutar in nativities. In this chapter, the author teaches how to direct the ascendant degree in nativities. The meaning of the text is this: Consider in whose planet's term the ascendant degree is, and consider the end of that term. Then seek the ascensions of the ascendant degree in the oblique circle by the table of your region and keep them; also seek the ascensions of the end of that term by the same table, from which subtract the ascensions of the ascendant degree, and the degrees that remain are the degrees of direction. Take for each degree one year, and for every five minutes one month, and for each minute six days, and for each hour two hours and twenty-four minutes of an hour; and the planet that is the lord of the term is the disposer of the years or the divisor. Afterwards, consider the end of the immediately following term, and subtract the ascensions of the preceding term's end from the ascensions of the end of that term; and the degrees of direction will remain. Take thus for each degree one year, and so on. And the lord of that term is the disposer or divisor; and in this way you will proceed to the end of each sign according to the order of the signs until the end of life. And if there is in any term any planet or rays of any planet, that planet will be the ruler in the division. An example I put here: the ascendant of a nativity was the fourth complete degree of Virgo. To direct this degree, first consider in whose planet's term this degree is. And it appears first that it is in Mercury's term, and the term lasts until the end of the seventh degree of Virgo. I sought the ascensions of the ascendant degree in the oblique horizon in the region whose latitude is 48 degrees, and I found 44 degrees and 27 minutes. I also sought the ascensions of the end of the term, namely the end of the seventh degree of Virgo, and I found 48 degrees and 33 minutes. I subtracted the ascensions of the ascendant degree from the ascensions of the end of the term, and 4 degrees and 6 minutes remained. I gave one year to each degree, and one month to every five minutes, and six days to each minute: there were four years, that is, one month and 26 days. And Mercury, the lord of the term, was the disposer of these years. Then I considered the immediately following term, which is Venus's, and it lasts until the end of the 17th degree of Virgo. I sought the ascensions of the end of that term, namely Venus's, and I found 62 degrees and 15 minutes. From these I subtracted the ascensions of the end of the preceding term, Mercury's, and 13 degrees and 44 minutes remained, which made 12 years, 8 months, and 12 days. And Venus disposed these years. At the end of this term, the native's age was 17 years, 9 months, and 18 days. Then follows Jupiter's term, which lasts until the 21st complete degree of Virgo. I sought its ascensions and found 67 degrees and 93 minutes. From these I subtracted the ascensions of the end of the preceding term, and 5 degrees and 28 minutes remained, which made 4 years, 3 months, and 18 days. Jupiter was the disposer of these years. The native's age at the end of these years was 23 years, 3 months, and 6 days. Then follows Mars's term, and it must be done as before: according to this order, the direction is continued until the end of life. As often as the direction reaches the body or rays of an infortune, illness or impediment will come to the native in his body according to the nature of that infortune, unless fortunes aspect that place. Then they will diminish the evil. And from this, the duodenaria of planets and houses. In this chapter, the author teaches how to find the duodenaria. It must be understood for the clarity of this chapter that each sign is understood to be divided into twelve parts, and each part is two degrees and 30 minutes. Dyfpalensis places this chapter and the two following chapters among the dignities of planets. The lord of the duodenaria is the lord of that sign. The lord of the second duodenaria is the succeeding planet descending, and so on according to order. For example: the lord of the first duodenaria of Aries is Mars, the second the Sun, the third Venus, the fourth Mercury, the fifth the Moon, the sixth Saturn, the seventh Jupiter, the eighth again Mars, and so on according to order. The author's meaning is this: When you wish to know the duodenarias of planets or houses, see how much the planet has traversed of the sign in which it is, or of the house in which it is, and multiply the number of those degrees by twelve; and to the product, add the number of degrees you multiplied. Whatever is collected, project it from the beginning of the sign.

[Finding the Lord of the Novenary]
in which the planet is, giving to each sign 3 degrees and 20 minutes. Where the number ends, there will be the novenary. And from this, Alchabitius teaches how to find the lord of the novenary. The meaning is this: When you wish to know the novenary or the lord of the novenary of any planet, see how many degrees the planet has traversed in the sign in which it is, or in the house in which it is. And divide that whole sign into 9 divisions. And each division will be of 3 degrees and 20 minutes. Then see in which part of that division the planet is. And you will give the first division to the lord of the movable sign of the same triplicity. And the second division to the lord of the following sign. And so on, according to the order of the signs, until you come to that novenary in which the planet is whose lord of the novenary you seek. For example: I assume that the Sun is in the 24th degree of Aquarius. To know the lord of the novenary of the Sun's degree, I first gave 3 degrees and 20 minutes of Aquarius to the lord of the movable sign of the same triplicity. Now Aquarius is of the airy triplicity. The movable sign of that triplicity is Libra; its lord is Venus. Therefore, Venus is the lady of the first novenary of Aquarius, that is, of the first 3 degrees and 20 minutes. Then I gave the second novenary to Mars, the lord of the following sign, that is, Scorpio. And then 6 degrees and 40 minutes were completed from the beginning of Aquarius. Then I gave the third novenary to Jupiter, that is, the lord of Sagittarius, who succeeds Scorpio. And then 10 degrees were completed from the beginning of Aquarius. I gave the fourth novenary to Saturn, the lord of Capricorn, who succeeds Sagittarius. And 13 degrees and 20 minutes were completed from the beginning of the sign. I gave the fifth novenary to Saturn, the lord of Aquarius. And 16 degrees and 40 minutes were completed. I gave the sixth novenary to Jupiter, the lord of Pisces. And 20 degrees were completed from the beginning of the sign of Aquarius. I gave the seventh novenary to Mars, the lord of Aries. And 23 degrees and 20 minutes were completed from the beginning of the sign. I gave the eighth novenary to Venus, the lord of Taurus. That, then, is the division of the Sun's novenary in the assumed case. And then 26 degrees and 40 minutes of Aquarius were completed. Therefore, when you find in books of judgments about the lord of the anaubarach of the luminaries, if it is by day, it refers to the lord of the Sun's novenary. If by night, to the lord of the Moon's degree novenary. Other things that the author says are clear by reading the text. This teaches how to find the decans. Its meaning is this: Divide the ascending sign into three parts. And each division will be of ten degrees. And you will give the first division to the lord of the ascendant. The second to the lord of the second sign. And the third to the lord of the third sign. He means that the first division is of the lord of the same sign that ascends. And the second division is of the lord of the following sign of the same triplicity. The third division is of the lord of the third sign of that triplicity. So that the three decans are the lords of the three signs of one triplicity. The author gives such an example in the text. Suppose that the first face of Aries is ascending, its decan is Mars. If the second face is ascending, its decan is the Sun, the lord of Leo, the second sign of the same triplicity. And if the third face is ascending, its decan is Jupiter, the lord of Sagittarius, which is the third sign of that triplicity. And if the first face of Leo is ascending, its decan is the Sun, the lord of the same sign. If the second face is ascending, its decan is Jupiter, the lord of the sign that succeeds Leo in the same triplicity. If the third face is ascending, its decan is Mars, the lord of the third sign from Leo in the same triplicity, that is, Aries. Understand this method for other triplicities.

[Lord of the Orb and Horary Lords]
And from this, the lord of the orb. In this chapter, he sets the order for the lord of the hours in nativities. The meaning of the text is this: Look at what hour the native emerges from the womb and the lord of that hour. Give it to the first year of the native's life, and through it, it signifies the state of the native's body, whether healthy or infirm, in that year, just as through the lord of the ascendant. And you will give the lord of the following hour to the second year, and through it, it signifies the state of substance in that year, just as through the lord of the house of substance. You will give the lord of the third hour to the third year from the hour of birth, and through it, it signifies the state of brothers in that year, just as through the lord of the third house. And in this way, you will proceed with the other lords of the hours, following the order of the hours and houses, until the end of life. And what it says in the text is clear. An example in this: Suppose someone was born on a Sunday, in the fourth hour. That fourth hour is the hour of the Moon. Therefore, the Moon will be the lord of the first year, and from it, the state of the body is taken. The following hour is of Saturn. Therefore, Saturn will be the lord of the second year, and from it, the state of substance in that year is taken. And so on, in order. And from this, the disposition of the firdaria. This chapter discusses the years of the firdaria and the governance of the planets in nativities. The meaning of the text is this: If the nativity was by day, the firdaria begins with the Sun, and the Sun governs the native according to the quantity of its firdaria years, which are ten. After the Sun, Venus governs for the quantity of its firdaria years, which are eight. After Venus, Mercury governs for 12 years. Then the Moon for nine years. Then Saturn for 11. Then Jupiter for 12 years. Then Mars for 7 years. Then the Head of the Dragon for three years. Then the Tail of the Dragon for two years. Then the disposition returns to the Sun and proceeds through the order of the planets as before. The total number of years is 75. And whoever exceeds this number of years returns to the first disposition as far as possible. If, however, the nativity is by night, the firdaria begins with the Moon, and the Moon disposes its years. Then Saturn. Then Jupiter. Then Mars. Then the Sun. Then Venus. Then Mercury. Then it returns to the Moon and proceeds according to the order of the planets as before. And when any planet disposes the years of its firdaria, it alone disposes the seventh part of those years. In the second seventh part, the planet that succeeds it participates with it. In the third, the third planet participates. In the fourth, the fourth. And in the fifth, the fifth. And so on, up to seven sevenths and seven planets. For example: I assume that someone was born by day. Therefore, the firdaria begins with the Sun, and the Sun governs him according to the quantity of its firdaria years, which are 10 years. And the Sun alone governed the seventh part of these ten years, that is, for one solar year and 156 days and 12 hours. For this is the seventh part of ten years. In the second seventh part of these ten years, Venus had participation with the Sun in the disposition of the firdaria for one year, 156 days, and 12 hours. And then two years and 313 days were completed for the native. Then Mercury had participation with the Sun in the disposition of the firdaria for one year and 156 days and 12 hours. And at the end of this disposition

[Planetary Firdaria and Elevation]
of the division, 4 solar years, 104 days, 6 hours passed for the native. Then the Moon had a participation with the Sun through the same seventh part for 10 years. At the end of this division, 260 years, 18 days, 18 hours passed for the native. Then Saturn had a participation with the Sun through the seventh part for 10 years, and at the end of this division, 52 complete years passed for the native. Then Jupiter had a participation with the Sun in the disposition of the firdaria through the same seventh part. At the end of this division, 8 solar years, 208 days, 12 hours passed for the native. Then Mars had a participation with the Sun in the disposition of the firdaria in the last seventh part of ten years, and at the end of this division, 10 complete years passed for the native. This is how it should be done for the firdaria of all planets. However, the Head and Tail of the Dragon, each disposes of the years of its firdaria or the participation of the planets by itself. To narrate the events contingent to the native in any of these divisions would be too long. But Abenragel in his great book completely set forth all divisions and the judgments of each division. Therefore, those who wish for these judgments should read that book. In this chapter, he teaches from this almanac. His intention is that the planet which was higher in its short circle, i.e., in the epicycle, is said to be elevated above the other by an elevation of which he speaks here. And this is what Ptolemy says in the 63rd proposition of the Centiloquium: He says that one must look at the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the same minute for the elevation of one above the other and judge with the strength of its nature in this world. And similarly, do this in the remaining 21 conjunctions. He says there in the commentary: the elevation of a planet above a planet is that its distance from the apogee of its short circle is such that it is said to be elevated above the other. But the author in the text orders to look at the mean place of the planet and the true place of the planet. And if the true place of the planet is less than the mean motion, the planet is descending from the upper part of the epicycle towards the lower part. But if the true place of the planet is greater than the mean motion, the planet is ascending from the lower part of the epicycle towards the upper part. To put it briefly, if the argument of the planet is less than six common signs, it is descending. And if it is more, it is ascending. Then the author orders to subtract the mean motion of the planet from its true motion if the mean motion is less than the true motion; or conversely if it is greater, that is, the smaller is subtracted from the larger, and he orders to multiply the remainder by seven. And he orders to divide the resulting number by 22, and he orders to take the quotient as the elevation when it ascends or as the depression when it descends. For Venus and Mercury, he orders to look at the difference between the place of each of them and the place of the Sun, and he orders to do as in the others. The method previously stated according to Ptolemy's opinion seems better and more certain to me. Then the author says that the stronger signification of the planets is when one of them is elevated above the other in conjunction. In opposition, however, and in the fourth aspect, the signification will be less apparent. And if one planet is ascending and the other descending, the one that is ascending goes above the descending one. If both are ascending, the one that has the greater ascension goes above the other. And if both are descending, the one that has the lesser ascension goes above the other.

[Elevation and Aperture of the Gates]
Descent. It also says that a planet is elevated above another planet's rising to a northern latitude, going above the meridian. And if both are northern, the one that is more northern goes above the one that is less northern. If both are southern, the one with the lesser latitude goes above the one with the greater latitude. If any planet is in the ecliptic lacking latitude, then the northern planet goes above it, and the one lacking latitude goes above the meridian. And from this comes the opening of the gates. The opening of the gates is said to occur when an inferior planet conjoins a superior planet, and their houses are opposite. For example, when the Moon conjoins Saturn or aspects it, then there is an opening of the gates. Similarly, when the Sun conjoins Saturn, for the houses of the Sun and Moon are opposite the houses of Saturn. Similarly, there is an opening of the gates when Mercury conjoins Jupiter, because the houses of both are opposite. Similarly, when Venus conjoins Mars, there is an opening of the gates because their houses are opposite. Hyspalensis says that Venus signifies humidity, Mercury signifies winds, Saturn signifies clouds and cold, Mars signifies winds from the right, i.e., from the south, and heat, Jupiter signifies temperance and winds from the left, i.e., from the north. The same Hyspalensis says that when the Moon separates from the conjunction of any planet or from its aspect and conjoins another planet, and the houses of those planets are opposite, this is a great opening of the gates, in which it is necessary for winds or rains to come, as is from the nature of those planets. For example, when the Moon, separating from Venus, conjoins Mars, or separating from Mercury, conjoins Jupiter, or separating from the Sun, conjoins Saturn, this is a great opening of the gates. And from this, Albumazar speaks of fortunate and unfortunate hours. They found 12 hours after the conjunction of the Sun and Moon and give them to the Sun, and divide them into three parts, and they judge the first four hours according to the judgment of the first lord of the triplicity of the Sun's place. And they judge the second four hours according to the judgment of the second lord of the triplicity of the Sun's place. And the last four hours according to the judgment of the third lord of the triplicity of the Sun's place at the hour of conjunction. Afterwards, they give the next 12 hours to Venus and divide them similarly into three parts, and they judge each four hours according to the judgment of the lords of the triplicity of Venus's place at the hour of conjunction. Afterwards, they do similarly with Mercury and the Moon and with the other planets in the order of the planets until the circle returns to the Sun after 84 hours. And then they receive from the Sun in the same order. And this continues until the second conjunction. And some say that after the conjunction there are 12 hours which are called combust, in which it is not good to begin any work. And after these 12 combust hours, there are 72 incombust hours, in which the beginning of works is useful. After these 72 incombust hours, there are again 12 combust hours, and again after those, 72 incombust hours, and after those, 12 combust hours, and so on until the next conjunction. And to put it briefly, all 12 hours that are given to the Sun according to the order of the planets are combust, and the 72 hours that are of the other planets are incombust. Then the author says, and they divide these 12 combust hours into three divisions, and each division will be of four hours. And some say that if one begins a war in the first four combust hours, the perdition of his soul is to be feared. The author does not understand the perdition of the soul after this life, so that after the soul's separation from the body, devils seize it and lead it to hell. But he understands the perdition of the soul, that is, the loss of present life, and he understands this in all places of astrological judgments. For it pertains to them to speak of this perdition. But of the first perdition, it pertains to theologians. And he who begins a war in the second four hours, the detriment of his body is to be feared, i.e., without loss of life. And he who begins a war in the last four hours, the loss of all that he possesses is to be feared, and the loss of those things that pertain to him. And thus is completed the exposition of the introduction of Alchabitius to the mastery of astrological judgments. Fifth difference in the commemoration of all parts. This is the fifth difference of this book, in which the author teaches the projection of parts, and it can be divided into two parts: because in the first part he places the parts that fall in nativities. And in the second part he places the parts that fall in the revolutions of the years of the world. The second part begins there: and with God's help. The first part is divided into two parts: because in the first part he gives the method of projecting parts in general and exemplifies with the part of fortune. In the second part he places the parts specifically, i.e., of the houses. The second part begins there. Let us begin after the part of fortune. The meaning of the first part is this. The method in the projections of parts is that equal degrees are taken which are between one place and another, and that number is projected from the ascendant or another place. Or the degrees that were from the beginning of the ascendant sign are added to the equal degrees that were between both places, and the product is computed from the beginning of the ascendant sign, giving to each sign 30 degrees. And where the number ends, there is the part of fortune. For example: I assume that the Sun is at the end of the sixth degree of Pisces, and the Moon is at the end of the 14th degree of Gemini, and the ascendant degree is the 10th degree of Aries. I subtract the true place of the Sun from the true place of the Moon, and 98 degrees remain, to which I add 10 degrees, which are from the beginning of Aries to the ascendant degree, and 108 degrees result. I begin to project from the beginning of Aries, giving to each sign 30 degrees, and this number ends in the 28th degree of Cancer. There, then, is the part of fortune in the example given. Let us begin, therefore, by placing in each house the parts pertaining to it. And it can be divided into as many parts as there are houses where the parts begin, as is clear in the text. First, he places the parts of the first house, and there are six. The first is the part of life. The second is the part of Hyleg. The third is the part of future things or the part of divination. The fourth is the part of affection and concord. The fifth is the part of stability of duration. The sixth is the part of animosity and audacity. He says in the text, when you wish to know the part of life, take the degrees that are from Jupiter to Saturn by day, and by night the degrees that are from Saturn to Jupiter, and project from the ascendant. Albumazar says in his great introduction that this part signifies natural life and the being of the body and sustenance, which if it is in good condition, signifies length of life and health of body and joy of soul. If, however, it is impeded, it signifies shortness of life and a multitude of infirmities of soul and sadness and sorrow. Then the author says, the part of Hyleg is taken from the degree of the conjunction that preceded the nativity if the nativity was conjunctal, or from the degree of prevention, i.e., opposition, if the nativity was preventional, to the degree of the Moon, and projected from the ascendant of the nativity, and where the number ends, there is the part of Hyleg. Albumazar says that this part directs as Hyleg directs by degree, and its perfection is led through the signs as is done with Hyleg. When its direction or perfection comes to malefics, it signifies impediment and danger. And there were many wise astrologers who, when they found a man suffering great dangers at certain times and did not find at the same time that his Hyleg had come to places of malefics, nor did they find the same impediment suffering signification in the revolution of the same year, they did not know the cause of this thing. And therefore this was hidden from them: because they did not direct this part, and if they had directed it, they would have found this evil to happen at the same time that this part had come to certain places signifying the danger itself. The part of future things is taken by day from the Moon to the Sun, and by night the opposite, and projected from the ascendant. And the properties of this part, according to Albumazar, are to signify the soul and the body and their being. And it signifies faith and prophecy and region and the worship of God and secrets and thoughts and intentions and hidden and concealed things: and everything that is absent from things, in this way you will apply judgments in others, and from what place to what place each is taken and from what place it is projected is clear in the text. Second house. Here he places the parts of the second house, and there are three. The first is the part of substance. The second is the part of poverty and meanness of spirit. The third is the part of blessedness, triumph, and victory. Albumazar says that the part of substance signifies profit and sustenance and food by which bodies are sustained, which if it is in a good place, signifies good being in substance, food, and sustenance. And if it is impeded, it signifies evil being in these things that we have said. But the other species of fortune appearing from substance, if they are treasured and kept and acquired, signify the other significators of substance and the part of fortune. Third house. Here he places the parts of the third house.

[Parts for the Duration of a Kingdom]
where the strength is to the place where the planets conjoin. And unless this is understood, it is impossible. For it assumes that one knows the degree of the ascendant at the hour of the conjunction of the superior planets. But this is impossible, as Abraham Avenezra says, for he says it is impossible to know the day on which the conjunction should occur; and this would be a great thing. It is also done in another way, namely, it is taken from the degree of the Midheaven of the revolution of that year in which the conjunction occurred, up to the Sun, and projected from the degree of Jupiter. The second part, by which it is known how long the king's reign should last. Here, the hour of the king's election is taken from the Sun in the 15th degree of Leo. And it is projected from the Moon. It is also taken from the Moon in the 15th degree of Cancer and projected from the Sun. This part is about the time of the king's election. Here, the hour of the king's election is taken on the day from Jupiter to Saturn, and at night the opposite, and projected from the ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the king rose. And if Jupiter is in a common sign and the revolution is diurnal, and with this Jupiter is cadent from an angle, then it is taken from Saturn to Jupiter, and 30 degrees are added above, and it is projected from the ascendant. If, however, Jupiter and Saturn are opposite each other and both are cadent from the ascendant, half of the degrees between them are taken and projected from the ascendant. And if Jupiter is in its exaltation and the revolution is at night, it is counted from it to Saturn and projected from the ascendant. Then the author says that there are two main parts from which the election of the king and its duration are extracted. The first of these is that you look at the hour of the king's election and see where the perfection of the year comes from the conjunction of the triplicity that signified that sect in which that kingdom is, giving to every 30 degrees a year, and to every two and a half degrees a month. And thus, the mixed proportion is to the hour of the election. And when you know in what degree of the sign it is, keep that degree, for from it you will go to the first part. And when you want to calculate it, you will apply the ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the elected one rose. Afterwards, look at Saturn and Jupiter, and whichever of them is oriental from the Sun, take from that one up to the degree of the equation of the first part that you kept, and project from the ascendant of the revolution, and where the number comes, that is the place of the first part. And note, the author says, take from the planet oriental from the Sun, either Saturn or Jupiter, and does not say what should be done when both are oriental. I believe that then it should be taken from the one closest to the Sun. Also, it does not say what should be done if neither of them is oriental. To be brief, I do not know what should be done, as I have not seen these two parts set out in this way in any other book. The second part is known in this way: Look at the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in which the king rose or began to reign, to what sign and degree the perfection of the year comes, giving to each year 30 degrees, and to each month 2 and a half degrees, up to the day on which the king rose, and that is the place of the equation of the first part, keep it. After this, take from Saturn or Jupiter, whichever is oriental, up to the place of the second part, and project from the ascendant of the revolution of the year, and where the number comes, that is the place of the second part. These are the parts that signify the strength of the king and his duration. Balya Abenragel says: Look at the revolution of the years of the world for the enthronement of the enthroned. First from Saturn, which is the first part, and from Jupiter, which is the second. And how many degrees and how many minutes are between them, and note this. Afterwards, consider in what sign the lord of the Midheaven is, and reduce those degrees to the ascensions of that sign in which it is, and what comes out from there will be what lasts for years or months or days. And if it is in its houses or exaltations, it will be years; and if they are peregrine in succedent houses, it will be months; otherwise, it will be days. Similarly, when the Sun applies to Mars, and Mars is void of course, not applying to Saturn, it signifies that soldiers will move against the enthroned one and will come upon him with raised weapons, and because of this, sadness and anxieties will befall him, and perhaps they will capture him. But if Mars with this applies to Saturn, their natures conjoin, and no one will move against him. Here, there are also other excetutory parts of the world by which it is known which things will be expensive and which cheap. The meaning of the natal letter. When you want to know whether a thing will be very expensive or cheap, or little, consider the part of that thing and see in which planet's house or exaltation or term or triplicity that part falls. If that planet is combust or retrograde or in some malignant place, that thing will become cheap and of little value. But if it is in a place of strength or in an angle, and especially in the Midheaven, that thing will be expensive and of greater value. And if the lord of that house comes to the place of its descent, that thing will become cheap. He means to say that if the planet has more strengths in the place of the part, in any of its dignities, and especially in its exaltation, or if it is in any of the angles, and especially in the Midheaven, that thing will be expensive. And according to the quantity of the planet's strength in its dignities or in angles or succedent houses, will be the quantity of the dearness. But if the planet itself is in its fall from its house or exaltation, or is in a cadent house from an angle, that thing will become cheap and of little value. Look also at the aspect of the benefics and malefics to it, that is, to the part and to the Moon, and who its lord is and how it aspects that part. If a benefic and the Moon aspect that part, the price of that thing will multiply. And if malefics aspect them, that thing will suffer detriment and will be cheap and of little value. I tell you that if the planet has more strengths in the place of the part in the revolution of the year, and is retrograde, and with this is in any of its dignities or in an angle, it signifies that that thing will be expensive, but not at the beginning of the year, as long as the lord of the part is retrograde. And when that planet begins to become direct, then that thing will begin to be expensive. In the same way, if the planet lord of the part is in its fall and is direct, it signifies the cheapness of the thing, but that cheapness will be greatest when the planet begins to be retrograde. Then he sets out the projections and begins with the part of wheat and says that the part of wheat is taken from the Sun to Mars and projected from the ascendant: from which places they are taken and from which places they are projected is clear in the text. And so that the method may be clearer, I will give an example of the part of wheat in the figure of the preceding conjunction of the Sun's ingress into Aries, and in the figure of the revolution of this year, that is, 1331. I say that in Paris, according to the truth of Alfonsine tables, at the hour of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon preceding the Sun's ingress into Aries, the ascendant will be the first degree of Cancer. The Sun's place at that hour will be 5 signs, 6 degrees, 42 minutes, 36 seconds. The true place of Mars was 1 sign, 44 degrees, 17 minutes, 28 seconds. I will see what is between the Sun and Mars by subtracting the Sun's place from Mars's place, and I find 1 sign, 47 degrees, 34 minutes, 52 seconds, which number I will compute from the ascendant, and the number terminates in Libra, 18 degrees, 10 minutes, 6 seconds. Then I will see what is strongest there, and I find Saturn stronger in that place, which is its exaltation, by virtue of which it has four strengths there. It is its triplicity, by virtue of which it has three strengths. It is also its face, by virtue of which it has one strength. Therefore, Saturn has 8 strengths in the place of the part of wheat. After Saturn is Venus, which is its house, and it has 5 strengths there. And Jupiter has its term there. I will look at the state of each of these in the figure, and according to their state, I will see about the fate of wheat. First, I will look at Saturn, what state it has in the figure, and I find it in the angle of the earth, not distant from the angle by 4 degrees. This signifies that wheat should be expensive, but not too much, because the angle is not strong, for the strongest of the angles in this regard is the Midheaven, then the ascendant, then the angle of the earth, and finally the western angle. But because Saturn is retrograde and peregrine in its place, having no dignity in its place, it signifies that wheat will be of little value at the beginning of the year. And when Saturn begins to become direct, its price will rise and it will be more expensive. This is the signification of Saturn. Then I will look at the state of Venus, and I find it in the 2nd house, its own house. This similarly signifies that wheat will be somewhat expensive. I will also look at the same part in the figure of the revolution of the same year. I say that the ascendant of the revolution in the aforesaid tables will be the fourth degree, 15 minutes, 26 seconds of Libra. The distance between the Sun and Mars will be 1 sign, 45 degrees, 3 minutes, 59 seconds. I will compute this number from the ascendant, and the number terminates in Capricorn, 19 degrees, 19 minutes, 25 seconds. Mars has its exaltation and triplicity in the place of this part, so it has seven strengths there. Saturn has its house and face there, so it has six strengths there. Mars is stronger in the place, and it is in the angle of the Midheaven. This signifies that wheat should be expensive, but because Mars is in its fall from its exaltation, it will not be expensive until it leaves its fall. This writing on Alchabitius, ordered by John of Saxony in the town of Paris, in the year 1331, is finished and corrected.

[Table of Contents and Publication Info]
Printed in Venice by Johannes and Gregorius de Gregoriis, brothers, in the year of the Lord 1502, on the 18th day of February. Table of the leaves of this work. Isagogic book. On the division of the table of houses. Where they are preferred. The second difference. Equal to short. The kind of fortune and its conjunction. The conjunction which at the beginning of the birth of the middle of the sky. To good or if a man has been twice, this perhaps will be not only to defend. Postulates from the Lord. It can be reasoned: because the angle of the midheaven will remain. Degrees. Contact of the horizon. Fiery will be something thought from the degree which is its brother. The ancients of all. The presence of the Lord. I looked into this question. They are according to in the north. The nature of the house. They are oriental. From that in the time in which the change by distance and with half a number one, etc. Finished.