L  I  E)  R.A 
OF  THE 
U  N  I  VERS  ITY 
or  ILLINOIS 

1335 
L62aEc 


Return  this  book  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 

Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books 
are  reasons  for  disciplinary  action  and  may 
result  in  dismissal  from  the  University. 
University  of  Illinois  Library 


23 

JUL  2  i 

OCT  26  m 


•MAY  20  I9E8 


11  0  5  # 


!36T 


JUL 


IHl 

NOV  ( 
DEC 

SEF 


13  !eS9 
1  6  1998 
ilN  1 1  1976 


MAR  1 


0  2  1982 
08W86 

L161— O'lOQe 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2015 

https://archive.org/details/astrologersguideOOIill 


0 

7 


THE 

ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


THE 

ASTROLOGER'S  GFIDE. 


ANIMA  ASTROLOQI^; 

OR, 

A    GUIDE  FOR  ASTROLOGERS. 


BEING 

THE  ONE  HUNDRED  AND  FORTY-SIX  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  THE 
FAMOUS  ASTROLOGER, 

GUIDO  BONATUS, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LATIN  BY  HENRY  COLEY, 

TOGETHER  WITH 

THE   CHOICEST   APHORISMS   OF   THE   SEVEN    SEGMENTS  OF 

JEEOM  CAEDAN  OF  MILAN, 

EDITED    BY    WILLIAM    LILLY  (1675). 


1^0 W  FIRST  REPUBLISHED  FROM  A    UNIQUE  COPY  OF  THE 
ORIGINAL  EDITION,  WITH  NOTES  AND  A  PREFACE 

BY 

WM.  C.  ELDON  SEEJEANT, 

FELLOW  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY. 


LONDON : 
GEORGE  REDWAY, 
YORK    STREET,    COYENT  GARDEN. 
1886. 


/33.5 


EDITOR'S  PREFACE. 


Those  whose  pursuits  have  led  them  to  collect  works  on 
the  Science  of  Astrology,  will  doubtless  recognise  in  this,  a 
work  that  has  long  been  a  desideratum. 

To  all  who  have  properly  studied  the  various  branches  of 
Judicial  Astrology,  the  utility  of  the  Considerations  of 
Bonatus,  and  the  Aphorisms  of  Cardan,  will  be  manifest 
after  even  the  most  casual  perusal.  William  Lilly,  the 
clever  Astrologer  of  the  seventeenth  century,  specially 
selected  these  from  a  mass  of  writings  at  his  disposal,  for 
publication  at  a  time  when  a  knowledge  of  Astrology,  and 
a  belief  in  the  science,  were  almost  general  among  the 
educated  classes.  In  a  short  account  of  the  life  of  Lilly, 
which  appeared  in  the  "  Magical  and  Physiognomical 
Mirror  "  for  October,  1791,  it  appears  that  this  was  the  last 
work  published  by  that  eminent  Astrologer ;  the  following 
is  a  verbatim  extract :  "  His  last  publication  was  his  *  Guide 
for  Astrologers,'  translated  from  the  Latin  of  Guido  Bonatus, 
a  good  piece,"  etc. 

The  lapse  of  two  hundred  years,  and  the  fate  that  awaited 
books  of  this  character  in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  have  served  to  scatter  and  destroy  all  but  a  few 
copies  of  the  edition  printed  in  1676,  and  the  very  existence 
of  this  work  is  at  present  known  only  to  assiduous  students 
of  astrological  lore,  and  to  the  fortunate  possessors  of  the 
few  copies  that  remain,  which  is  probably  the  chief  reason 
why  the  book  has  never  been  reprinted. 

Very  little  seems  to  be  known  of  the  life  of  Guido 
Bonatus.  Henry  Coley,  in  his  "Address  to  the  Keader," 
herein,  gives  an  anecdote  illustrating  the  skill  of  Bonatus, 
whose  writings  undoubtedly  prove  him  to  have  been  an 
able  master  of  the  science  which  he  professed. 


vi 


EDITOR'S  PREFACE. 


Jerom  Cardan,  the  author  of  the  Aphorisms  contained 
in  the  latter  portion  of  this  book,  was  born  at  Milan, 
on  the  first  of  October,  1501.  He  was  an  illegitimate 
child ;  and  his  mother  tried  to  prevent  his  being  born 
alive,  but  without  effect.  Ultimately,  he  was  brought 
into  the  world  by  means  of  the  Caesarian  operation,  and 
when  born,  his  head  was  already  covered  with  black  curly 
hair. 

In  the  year  1531  he  married,  though  previously  deterred 
by  considerations  relating  to  his  own  physical  condition, 
which  he  attributed  to  the  evil  influences  of  the  planet 
under  which  he  was  born,  and  always  regarded  as  one  of 
the  greatest  misfortunes  of  his  life. 

He  was  brought  up  as  a  physician,  and  became  a  professor 
of  medicine  in  most  of  the  Italian  universities.  In  the 
year  1570  he  was  put  into  prison;  on  being  released  he 
repaired  to  Rome,  where  he  attended  Pope  Gregory  XIII., 
as  a  physician,  for  which  he  received  a  pension  until  the 
year  1576,  when  he  died. 

Never  was  any  man  more  remarkable  for  a  strange  incon- 
sistency of  behaviour,  than  Cardan.  His  life  was  a  series 
of  odd  adventures,  which  he  has  committed  to  writing, 
with  a  simplicity,  or  rather  a  freedom,  seldom  to  be  met 
with  among  the  learned;  indeed,  it  seems  as  if  he  had 
written  the  history  of  his  life  for  no  other  purpose  than  to 
give  the  public  an  amazing  instance  of  the  fact  that  a  person 
may  be  endowed  with  great  genius,  yet  at  the  same  time  be 
void  of  reason. 

He  makes  an  ingenuous  confession  of  his  good  and  bad 
qualities.  He  seems  to  have  sacrificed  every  other  considera- 
tion to  a  desire  of  being  sincere ;  and  this  sincerity  being 
often  misplaced,  tarnishes  his  reputation. 

Although  Cardan  seldom  errs  when  giving  an  account  of 
his  morals  and  sentiments,  yet  we  must  rather  incline  to 
dissent  from,  than  to  believe,  what  he  relates  of  himself ; 
because  it  seems  almost  impossible  that  nature  could  have 
formed  a  character  so  capricious  and  inconsistent  as  he 
makes  himself  out  to  be. 

He  paid  himself  congratulatory  compliments  on  not 
having  a  friend  in  the  world,  but  that  in  lieu  of  which  he 
was  attended  by  a  Spirit  partly  emanating  from  Saturn,  and 


editor's  preface. 


vii 


partly  from  Mercury,  who  was  the  constant  guide  of  his 
actions,  and  teacher  of  every  duty  which  he  was  called 
upon  to  perform. 

He  also  stated  that  he  was  so  irregular  in  his  manner  of 
walking  the  streets,  as  to  induce  those  who  observed  him, 
to  point  at  him  as  a  fool.  Sometimes  he  walked  very  slow, 
like  a  man  absorbed  in  profound  meditation  ;  then  suddenly 
quickened  his  steps,  and  accompanied  them  with  very 
ridiculous  attitudes. 

In  Bologna  his  delight  was  to  be  drawn  about  in  a  mean 
vehicle  with  three  wheels.  The  liveliest  description  that 
can  be  given  of  this  singular  philosopher  is  couched  in  the 
following  quotation  from  Horace,  which  in  fact  Cardan 
confessed  to  agree  perfectly  well  with  his  character : 

"  Nil  sequali  homini  fuit  iUi  ;  sepe  velut  qui 
Currebat  fugiens  hostem,  persaepe  velut  qui 
Junonis  sacra  serret ;  habebat  sa?pe  ducentos, 
Ssepe  decern  servos,"  etc. 

Which  may  be  imitated  thus  : 

Whey^e  find  a  semblance  of  inconstancy  ? 
Noiv  quick  of  speed,  as  if  from  foes  he  fled, 
Noiv  sloio  he  moves,  and  with  a  solemn  air, 
As  if  great  Juno^s  altar  he^d  approach  ; 
Now  with  attendants  crowded^  now  alone,  etc. 

When  nature  did  not  visit  him  with  any  pain,  he  would 
inflict  it  on  himself,  by  biting  his  lips,  and  pulling  his 
fingers  with  such  violence,  as  sometimes  to  draw  tears  from 
his  eyes ;  and  the  reason  he  assigned  for  so  doing  was,  in 
order  to  moderate  certain  impetuous  sallies  of  the  mind, 
whose  violence  was  far  more  insupportable  to  him  than 
pain  itself  ;  and  that  the  sure  consequences  of  such  severe 
practice  procured  his  better  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of 
health. 

He  writes  that,  in  his  greatest  tortures  of  soul,  he  used  to 
whip  his  legs  with  rods,  and  bite  his  left  arm ;  that  it  was  a 
great  relief  to  him  to  weep,  but  that  very  often  he  could 
not ;  that  nothing  gave  him  more  pleasure  than  to  talk  of 
things  which  made  the  whole  company  uneasy;  that  he 
spoke  on  all  subjects,  whether  seasonably  or  not ;  and  that 
he  was  so  fond  of  all  games  of  chance,  as  to  spend  whole 
days  in  playing  at  them,  to  the  great  prejudice  of  his  family 


viii 


EDITOR  S  PREFACE. 


and  reputation,  for  he  even  staked  his  furniture  and  his 
v^ife's  jewels. 

Cardan  scrupled  not  to  own  that  he  was  revengeful, 
envious,  treacherous,  a  dealer  in  the  black  art,  a  backbiter, 
a  calumniator,  and  unreservedly  addicted  to  all  the  foul  and 
detestable  excesses  that  can  be  imagined ;  yet  notwith- 
standing so  humiliating  a  declaration,  there  never  was, 
perhaps,  a  man  more  vain,  or  one  that  with  less  ceremony 
expressed  the  high  opinion  he  had  of  himself.  He  writes 
thus  : 

have  been  admired  by  many  nations;  an  almost 
infinite  number  of  panegyrics  in  prose  and  verse  have  been 
composed  to  celebrate  my  fame.  I  was  born  to  release  the 
world  from  the  manifold  errors  under  which  it  groaned. 
What  I  have  found  out,  could  not  be  discovered  either  by 
my  predecessors,  or  my  contemporaries ;  and  that  is  the 
reason  why  those  authors,  who  write  anything  worthy  of 
being  remembered,  blush  not  to  own  that  they  are  indebted 
to  me  for  it.  I  have  composed  a  book  on  the  dialectic  art, 
in  which  there  is  neither  a  superfluous  letter,  nor  one 
deficient.  I  finished  it  in  seven  days,  which  seems  a  prodigy. 
Yet  where  is  there  a  person  to  be  found,  that  can  boast  of 
his  having  become  master  of  its  doctrine  in  a  year  ?  And 
he  that  shall  have  comprehended  it  in  that  time,  must 
appear  to  have  been  instructed  by  a  familiar  Demon." 

When  we  consider  the  transcendent  qualities  of  Cardan's 
mind,  we  cannot  deny  his  having  cultivated  it  with  every 
species  of  knowledge,  and  having  made  a  greater  progress 
in  philosophy,  in  medicine,  in  astronomy,  in  mathematics, 
etc.,  than  the  majority  of  his  contemporaries,  who  had 
applied  their  study  but  to  one  of  those  sciences. 

Scaliger,  who  wrote  with  much  warmth  against  Cardan, 
was  candid  enough  to  own  that  he  was  endowed  with  a 
very  comprehensive,  penetrating,  and  incomparable  mind. 

Cardan  has  been  accused  of  impiety,  and  even  atheism, 
because  in  his  work  "DeSubtilitate,"  he  quotes  some  principles 
of  different  religions,  with  the  arguments  upon  which  they 
were  founded.  He  proposes  the  reasons  offered  by  the 
Pagans,  by  Jews,  by  the  Mahomedans,  and  by  the  Christians, 
but  those  of  the  last  in  the  weakest  light.  Nevertheless  in 
reading  one  of  his  works,  "  De  Vita  Propria,"  we  find  more 
characteristic  marks  of  a  credulous  man  than  a  free- 
thinker. 


EDITOR  S  PREFACE. 


ix 


It  is  true  that  he  owns  he  was  not  a  devotee,  imrum 
pius,  but  he  at  the  same  time  declares,  that  although 
naturally  vindictive,  he  often  let  slip  the  opportunity  of 
satisfying  his  resentment.  Let  such  a  neglect,  then,  be 
ascribed  to  his  veneration  of  the  Deity, 

"  Dei  ob  venerationem." 

He  writes,  There  is  no  form  of  worship  more  pleasing  to 
the  Deity  than  that  of  obeying  the  law,  against  the  strongest 
impulsion  of  our  natures  to  transgress  against  it."  He 
proudly  boasted  of  having  refused  a  considerable  sum  of 
money  offered  to  him  by  the  King  of  England,  on  condition 
that  he  would  give  him  those  titles  which  the  Pope  had 
taken  from  him.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  in.  any  work 
proofs  of  more  solidity  and  good  sense  than  in  the  reflections 
made  by  him  in  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  the  above- 
mentioned  book,  where  he  unfolds  his  ideas  of  religion. 
The  reason  which  he  assigns  for  his  love  of  solitude,  instead 
of  making  him  liable  to  the  charge  of  impiety,  ought  rather 
to  free  him  from  the  same.    "  When  I  am  alone,"  he  writes_, 

I  am  then,  more  than  at  any  other  time,  in  company  with 
those  I  love — the  Deity,  and  my  good  Angel." 

Cardan  had  many  irregular  faculties,  that  were  more  bold 
than  judicious,  and  was  fonder  of  a  redundancy  than  a 
choice  of  materials  to  work  upon.  The  same  capriciousness 
observable  in  his  moral  conduct  is  to  be  remarked  in  the 
composition  of  his  works. 

There  are  a  number  of  his  treatises  in  which  the  reader 
is  stopped  almost  every  moment  by  the  obscurity  of  the 
text,  or  the  digressions  from  the  subject  in  point. 

In  his  arithmetical  works  there  are  several  discourses  on 
the  motions  of  the  planets,  on  the  Creation,  and  on  the 
tower  of  Babel. 

In  his  dialectic  work,  he  gives  his  opinions  on  historians 
and  the  writers  of  epistles.  The  only  apology  which  he 
makes  for  the  frequency  of  his  digressions  is,  that  they  are 
purposely  done  for  the  sooner  tilling  up  the  sheet,  his 
bargain  with  the  bookseller  being  at  so  much  per  sheet,  and 
that  he  worked  as  much  for  his  daily  support  as  for  the 
acquisition  of  glory. 

Cardan  was  instrumental  in  reviving  the  sacred  philosophy 
of  the  Cabala,  and  the  Cabalists,     The  Aphorisms  of  his 


X 


editor's  preface. 


Seven  Segments,  contained  in  this  book,  are  of  great  value 
to  Astrologers. 

For  the  information  of  those  who  might  peruse  this 
work,  and  who  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  science  on 
which  it  treats,  we  may  mention  that  Astrology  is  held  to 
be  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  all  sciences.  Josephus*  writes 
that  Adam,  Seth,  Enos,  and  most  of  the  Patriarchs  were 
great  Astrologers,  and  after  them  Abraham,  who  taught 
both  the  Chaldeans  and  Egyptians.  The  same  historian 
states  that  he  has  seen  the  remains  of  the  two  pillars 
of  stone  upon  which  Seth,  foreseeing  the  flood,  engraved  the 
rudiments  of  the  science. 

This  book  does  not  profess  to  be  an  elementary  work  ;  it 
is  intended  for  the  use  of  students  somewhat  advanced  in 
Astrology.  To  persons  desirous  of  thoroughly  learning  this 
branch  of  occult  philosophy,  we  recommend  the  works  of 
the  following  writers :  On  Genethliacal  Astrology — 
Ptolemy,!  Placidus,'*^  Partridge,^  Wilson,^  Oxley,^  Morrison 
(Zadkiel),*^  and  Pearce.'^  On  Mundane  Astrology,  the 
Doctrine  of  Elections,  Decumbitures,  etc. — Ptolemy,^ 
Ramesey,^  and  Saunders.^  On  Horary  Astrology — Lilly and 

*  Joseph.  Antiq.,  B.  I.,  ch.  4-8,  etc. 

^  Ptolemy's  Tetrabiblos ;  translated  by  Ashmand,  8vo.,  London, 
1822. 

2  Primum  Mobile,  Placidus  de  Titus  ;  translated  by  John  Cooper, 
8vo.,  N.D. 

3  An  Astrological  Vade-Mecum  for  Students  in  Astrology  ;  by  John 
Partridge,  12nio.,  London,  1679. 

Opus  Reformatum  ;  by  John  Partridge,  4to.,  London,  1693. 
Defectio  Geniturarum  ;  by  John  Partridge,  4to.,  London,  1697. 

4  A  Complete  Dictionary  of  Astrology  ;  by  John  Wilson,  8vo.,  n.d. 

5  The  Gem  of  the  Astral  Sciences  ;  by  Thomas  Oxley,  8vo.,  n.d. 
^  The  Grammar  of  Astrology  ;  by  Zadkiel,  12mo.,  London,  1849. 
The  Handbook  of  Astrology ;  by  Zadkiel,  Vol.  IL  (Nativities), 

small  8vo.,  London,  1864. 

Zadkiel's  Legacy,  Essay  on  Astrology,  Nativity  of  H.R.H.  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  etc,  ;  8vo.,  London,  1842. 

7  The  Text-Book  of  Astrology,  Vol.  L,  Genethliacal ;  by  Alfred  J. 
Pearce,  8vo.,  London,  1879. 

^  Astrology  Restored  ;  by  William  Ramesey,  folio,  London,  1654. 

9  The  Astrological  Judgment  and  Practice  of  Physic  ;  by  Richard 
Saunders,  8vo.,  London,  1677. 

1°  Christian  Astrology  ;  by  William  Lilly,  4to.,  London,  1647. 

An  Introduction  to  Astrology,  by  William  Lilly,  with  Notes  and 
Emendations  by  Zadkiel,  8vo.,  London,  1835. 

This  work,  together  with  ZadkiePs  Grammar  of  Astrology,  has  been 


editor's  preface. 


xi 


Zadkiel.^^  On  Astro -Meteorology — Goad.^^  The  works  of 
Doriat,i3  Heydon,!*  2^11,^^  PeDseyre/^^  Coley,!^  Elaiid,!^ 
Salmon,^^  Worsdale/^Simmonite,^^  Raphael,^^  Sliemaya,^^  and 
Zuriel,2*  are  worthy  of  the  student's  perusal,  and  much  use- 
ful information  can  be  gleaned  therefrom.  The  works  of 
E-amesey  and  Partridge  are  rare  and  priceless ;  in  fact,  most 
of  the  older  works  quoted  are  now  very  scarce  ;  they  can 
all  be  seen  and  read  at  the  British  Museum,  but  are  to  be 
met  with  in  very  few  private  libraries. 

The  science  of  the  stars  has  of  late  years  fallen  into 
disrepute,  chiefly  owing  to  impostors,  but  also  to  zealous 
persons  endeavouring  to  practise  an  art  in  which  they  have 
not  been  suflBciently  well  read  to  give  correct  judgments ; 
not  a  little,  however,  does  it  owe  its  present  position  to  the 
erroneous  publications  on  the  subject,  which  from  time  to 
time  have  been  palmed  oft'  on  the  unsuspecting  and  anxious 
student  as  works  of  use  and  value. 


reprinted,  bound  together  in  one  volume,  and  published  in  the 
"  Bohn  "  series. 

The  Handbook  of  Astrology,  Vol.  I.  (Horary),  by  Zadkiel,  small 
8vo.,  London,  1863. 

12  Astro-meteorologica,  etc. ;  by  J.  Goad,  folio,  London,  1686. 

^3  A  Brief  and  Easy  Introduction  to  Astrology ;  by  Claudius 
Doriat,  small  4to.,  1598. 

Dariotus  Kedivivus  ;  4to.,  London,  1653. 

14  An  Astrological  Discourse  ;  by  Sir  Christopher  Heydon,  12mo., 
London,  1650. 

^5  Astrology  Improved  ;  by  Richard  Ball,  12mo.,  1723. 

i6  A  New  Guide  to  Astrology  ;  by  Samuel  Penseyre,  12mo.,  1726. 

^7  Clavis  Astrologiae  EHmata  ;  by  Henry  Coley,  8vo.,  London, 
1676. 

Eland's  Tutor  to  Astrology  ;  by  George  Parker,  18mo.,  1704. 
^9  Horae  Mathematicse  seu  Urania ;  by  William  Salmon,  8vo., 
1679. 

20  Genethliacal  Astrology  ;  by  John  Worsdale,  8vo.,  Newark,  1798. 
Celestial  Philosophy ;  by  John  Worsdale,  8vo.,  Lincoln,  n.d. 

21  The  Arcana  of  Astral  Philosophy ;  by  W.  J.  Simmonite,  8yo., 
1847. 

The  Astro  Philosopher  and  Meteorologist ;  by  W.  J.  Simmonite, 
8vo.,  N.D.,  about  1851. 

The  Prognostic  Astronomer  (Horary  Astrology) ;  by  W.  J. 
Simmonite,  12mo.,  Leeds,  1852. 

22  A  Manual  of  Astrology ;  by  Raphael,  8vo.,  London,  1837. 

23  The  Star  ;  by  Ebn  Sbemaya,  8vo.,  1839 

24  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Celestial  Philosophy ;  by  Zuriel, 
8vo.,  1835. 


xii 


editor's  preface. 


The  desire  and  belief  of  the  present  editor  is,  that  the 
republication  of  a  few  of  the  more  philosophical  works 
relating  to  this  science  may  win  for  it  some  degree  of 
recognition  from  the  large  and  increasing  body  of  students 
of  the  Occult  Sciences ;  these  views  are  shared  by  the 
publisher,  who  has  ventured  upon  the  unusual  course  of 
issuing,  in  this  sceptical  age,  a  work  professing  seriously  to 
deal  with  the  Science  of  the  Stars. 

St.  Benet's  Abbey, 
Near  Bodmin,  Cornwall, 
mh  April,  1886. 


Anima  AJlrologice  : 

OR,  A 

GUIDE 

FOR 

ASTROLOGERS. 

BEING 

The  confiderations  of  the  Famous 

GUIDO  BONATUS 
Faithfully  rendred  into  Englifh. 

As  alfo 

The  Choiceft  Aphorifms  of 
CARDAN'S  Seaven  Segments, 
Tranflated,  and  methodically  digefted 
under  their  proper  Heads. 

With  a  New  Table  of  the  fixed  Stars, 

rectified  for  feveral  years  to  come, 
and  divers  other  neceffary  Illuftrations. 

A  Work  moft  ufefiil  and  neceffary  for 
all  Students,  and  recommended 
as  fuch  to  the  Sons  of  Art. 

By  William  Lilly,  Student  in  Aftrology. 


London^  Printed  for  B.  Harris  at  the  Statio- 
ners^ Arms  in  Sweethings  Rents  near  the 
Royal  Exchange,  1676. 


LICENSED, 

April .  29  .  1675  . 

Roger  VEftrange, 


ADDRESS  BY  WILLIAM  LILLY. 


TO  THE  maENIOUS  LOVEES  OF  AET. 

We  had  formerly  some  thoughts  of  revising  our  Introduc- 
tion to  Astrology,  now  out  of  print,  and  to  have  enriched 
it  for  another  edition  with  the  choicest  aphorisms,  both 
from  the  writings  of  the  ancients  and  our  own  many  years' 
experience,  but  the  laboriousness  of  that  work,  considering 
our  age  and  many  infirmities  of  body,  with  the  discourage- 
ments we  have  already  met  with  from  some  ungrateful 
persons,*  caused  us  lay  aside  (at  least  for  the  present)  those 
intentions. 

Yet  that  we  might  not  be  wholly  wanting  to  promote 
anything  that  might  tend  to  the  advancement  of  Art  and 
gratification  of  its  painful  f  students,  and  knowing  how 
necessary  the  ensuing  Considerations  of  Guido  Bonatus  and 
Aphorisms  adjoined,  are  to  be  known  and  regarded,  which 
many  of  our  ingenious  countrymen  could  not  do,  for  that 
they  have  hitherto  remained  in  the  Latin  tongue  with  the 
rest  of  the  works  of  those  authors  in  large  volumes,  difficult 
to  be  got  at  and  too  chargeable  for  many  to  buy,  we  there- 
fore recommend  them  to  a  friend  J  to  be  translated  by 

*  Allusion  is  here  evidently  made  to  John  Gadbury  the  Astrologer 
and  some  of  his  pupils,  with  whom  Lilly  had  been  at  variance, 
t  I.e.,  laborious. 

X  Henry  Coley,  one  of  his  pupils,  and  latterly,  his  amanuensis. 


xvi 


ADDRESS  BY  WILLIAM  LILLY. 


themselves,  which  he  has  judiciously  performed  in  plain 
significant  language,  so  that  we  judge  the  work  may  deserve 
the  title  of  Anima  Astrologise  which  we  have  given  it, 
comprehending  the  marrow  and  substance  of  Astrology,  and 
much  excellent  matter  necessary  to  be  observed  by  all 
honest  students  that  practise  Art  to  discover  truth  and  not 
to  vapour  with."^ 

We  doubt  not  but  the  legitimate  sons  and  well-wishers 
of  Urania  will  find  considerable  advantages  from  hence, 
directing  them  to  a  certainty  in  giving  judgments  upon  all 
occasions,  and  that  they  will  for  this  publication  have  cause 
to  thank  their  old  friend 

WILLIAM  LILLY. 

Walton-upon-Thames, 
^nd  August,  1675. 


This  is  probably  a  sly  hit  at  John  Gadbury,  with  whose  judg- 
ments of  astrological  figures  and  remarks  thereon,  Lilly  found  fault;  as 
indeed  at  a  later  period  did  Doctor  John  Partridge  the  Astrologer, 
who  wrote  a  work  ("  Opus  Keformatum :"  London,  1693)  exposing 
and  rectifying  the  errors  of  one  of  Gadbury's  works  ("A  Collection 
of  150  Nativities  "  :  London,  1658).  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  Doctor 
Partridge,  who  was  one  of  the  most  truthful  of  Genethlical  Astrologers 
that  ever  lived,  quotes  Bonatus  in  his  Opus  Keformatum,  thereby 
showing  his  esteem  for  the  Considerations  of  our  Author. 


HENRY  COLBY'S  ADDEESS  TO  THE  READEE. 


Thou  art  here  presented  with  two  choice  pieces  of  Art  in 
our  mother  tongue ;  the  first,  the  Considerations  of  Guido 
Bonatus,  a  person  no  less  happy  in  the  practice  than  skilful 
in  the  theory  of  Astrology  of  which  I  will  here  give 
thee  one  instance  as  it  is  recorded  by  that  eminent 
Historian  Fulgusos,  L.  8,  c.  11.  That  Guido  Earl  of  Mount- 
Serrant  being  besieged  in  that  city,  our  Author  Bonatus 
sent  him  word,  that  if  such  a  day  and  hour  he  would  make 
a  sally  on  the  enemies'  camp,  he  should  give  them  an 
absolute  defeat,  and  force  them  to  raise  their  siege  and  quit 
the  place,  but  should  himself  receive  a  dangerous  (but  not 
mortal)  wound  in  the  thigh.  The  Earl  took  his  council, 
made  his  sally  on  the  day  appointed,  providing  himself  of 
all  things  necessary  in  case  of  a  wound,  and  according  to 
the  prediction,  though  vastly  inferior  in  numbers,  obtained  a 
most  signal  and  entire  victory,  but  following  the  pursuit  was 
wounded  in  the  place  foretold,  of  which  in  short  time  he 
recovered.* 

The  second,  consists  of  the  choicest  Aphorisms  of  Car- 
danus,  a  man  famous  to  the  learned  world,  and  of  whom 
the  judicious  and  severe  Scaliger  (though  an  adversary)  in 
the  preface  to  the  book  he  wrote  against  him,  gives  a  most 
respective  and  applauding  character.  These  Aphorisms  (by 
which  is  meant  short  comprehensive  and  approved  rules  of 

Kaphael  quotes  this  in  his  work  "A  Manual  of  Astrology" 
(London,  1834). 


xviii 


PROEM. 


Art)  were  in  the  original  delivered  promiscuously,  but  I  for 
better  method  have  taken  the  pains  here  to  marshall  them 
under  their  distinct  and  proper  titles,  and  that  I  might  not 
unnecessarily  charge  the  reader,  have  omitted  such  as  seemed 
trivial  or  superfluous ;  this  much  I  thought  fit  to  premise, 
and  have  only  more  to  add,  that  by  reason  of  my  absence 
some  faults  have  escaped  the  press,  besides  those  which 
myself  may  be  chargeable  with  in  the  translation ;  the 
Reader  will  show  his  judgment  in  distinguishing,  and  his 
good  nature  in  pardoning  them.  Vale. 

H.  C. 

PROEM. 

Amongst  those  things  that  appertain  to  giving  judge- 
ment in  questions  of  Astrology,  there  are  six  to  be  chiefly 
considered  : — 1^*  Nations,  and  their  particular  kinds.  2°^^^ 
Families,  and  the  constitutions  and  ordinations  of  Families 
and  Houses.  3^^^^  Eich  and  potent  persons,  Dispositions 
and  Affairs.  4^^^^  Regard  is  to  be  had  to  the  lodividuals 
of  human  kind.  5*^^^  Elections  or  times  proper  for  the 
beginning  of  any  Work  or  Enterprise.  6^^^^  Questions  as 
well  universal  as  particular,  pertinent  and  fit  to  be  de- 
manded. 

But  first  of  al]  there  are  some  things  necessary  to  be  pre- 
mised :  As  the  fit  manner  of  propounding  a  question,  and 
divers  other  points  to  be  observed  in  giving  judgement.  Of 
which  sort  of  considerations  we  shall  reckon  up  no  fewer 
than  One  Hundred  Forty  and  Six,  which  though  'tis  impos- 
sible they  should  happen  or  be  observed  altogether;  yet 
they  all  deserve  to  be  known,  and  without  them  an 
Astrologer  shall  never  be  able  to  give  true  and  perfect 
judgement.  But  before  we  treat  distinctly  of  them  it  will 
be  convenient  to  say  a  little  of  the  right  way  or  manner 
how  a  question  should  be  proposed ;  for  to  judge  of  things  to 


PROEM. 


xix 


come,  is  no  easy  task,  nor  indeed  can  it  always  be  exactly 
performed ;  but  we  may  come  near  the  truth,  and  differ 
from  it  only  in  some  small  time  or  circumstances;  which 
difficulty  should  not  at  all  discourage  us  from  studying  and 
endeavouring  to  obtain  as  great  a  knowledge  therein,  as 
Human  minds  are  capable  of;  for  since  inferiors  are 
governed  by  superiors  (as  all  agree),  and  that  the  nature 
and  disposition  of  such  superiors  may  be  known  by  their 
motions,  which  are  now  exactly  found  out  by  the  learned 
in  Astronomy ;  we  may  thence  undoubtedly  arrive  at  an 
ability  of  judging  of  things  to  come:  That  is  declare  what 
will  happen  by  or  from  such  their  motions,  and  by  con- 
sequence truly  foretell  future  accidents  ;  for  this  art  has  its 
peculiar  rules  and  Aphorisms  and  its  end  is  judgment,  which 
takes  off  their  objection  who  say  that  Astrology  is  nothing 
worth  ;  for  it  would  not  be  an  Art,  unless  it  had  its  proper 
precepts ;  but  that  it  is  an  Art,  we  have  sufficiently  proved 
elsewhere,  and  the  same  is  generally  acknowledged;  and  its 
end  is  to  give  judgement  as  aforesaid,  which  are  of  accidents 
imprinted  on  inferiors  by  the  motions  of  the  superior  bodies, 
and  their  qualities  and  effects  in  or  upon  the  same. 


THE  TABLE  OR  CONTENTS  OF  THE  ^SEVERAL 
CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


PAGE 

1.  To  consider  what  moves  a  man  to  propose  a  Question         -  1 

2.  The  course  the  Querent  should  take  when  he  goes  to  an 

Astrologer    -         -         -         -         -         -         -  1 

3.  How  many  ways  the  Planets  operate  in  Inferiors      -         -  2 

4.  Of  the  causes  assisting  to  accomplish  things  -         -         -  2 

5.  How  many  ways  such  states  of  the  Moon  does  happen        -  3 

6.  Another  way  of  the  Planets  being  debilitated  not  much 

different       -------  5 

V.  To  beware  of  those  things  that  lead  an  Artist  into  error      -  6 

8.  To  see  how  many  Considerations  thou  shouldst  use  -         -  7 

9.  To  consider  the  helpers  or  hinderers  of  a  business    -         -  8 

10.  The  Fixed  Stars  that  so  hinder  or  help         -         -          -  12 

11.  To  consider  the  Infortunes,  what  they  signify          -         -  13 

12.  What  the  Fortunes  signify      -         -         -  •        -         -  13 

13.  What  the  Sun  signifies           -         -          -         -         -  14 

14.  What  Mercury  and  the  Moon  signifies          -         -         -  14 

15.  How  the  Planets  make  their  Impressions  on  Inferiors         -  14 

16.  Whether  the  Significator  be  afflicted  by  either  of  the  Infortunes  14 

17.  Whether  the  Planet  be  free  from  Impediment         -         -  15 

18.  Whether  a  Planet  is  in  the  Angles  of  the  Inferiors   -         -  16 

19.  Whether  the  Moon  be  void  of  course  -          -          -         -  17 

20.  Whether  the  Moon  or  Significator  be  joined  to  any  of  the 

Planets        -------  17 

21.  From  what  Planet  the  Moon  separates          -         -         -  17 

22.  Whom  she  next  applies  to       -         -         -         -         -  17 

23.  Her  condition  as  joined         -         -          -         -         -  17 

24.  Whether  a  Planet  be  in  his  declension          -         -         -  18 

25.  Whether  a  Planet  be  Retrograde  or  Stationary        -          -  18 

26.  Whether  Stationary  to  Retrogradation  or  Direction  -          -  18 

27.  Whether  the  Infortunes  be  Significators       -         -          -  18 

28.  Whether  the  Significator  be  slow       -         -          -         -  18 

29.  Whether  the  Moon  be  in  Corporal  Conjunction  with  any 

Planet         -         -         -         -         -         -         -  19 

30.  Whether  the  Significator  or  Moon  be  past  29°  of  the  Sign 

they  are  in    -         -         -         -         -         -         -  19 

31.  When  one  Planet  applies  to  the  Conjunction  of  another      -  19 

32.  If  an  Infortune  be  Significator,  his  condition           -         -  20 

33.  Whether  an  Infortune  be  Significator  -         -         -          -  20 

34.  On  what  to  ground  Judgement          -         -         -         -  20 

35.  Whether  a  Planet  be  in  Signs  agreeable        -         -         -  21 

36.  When  the  Infortunes  signify  Impediment     -          -         -  21 

37.  Whether  Fortunes  are  Significators    -         -         -         -  21 


xxii  THE  TABLE  OR  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

38.  If  Significators  are  Cadent      -         -         -         -         -  21 

39.  Whether  the  Signihcator  be  in  Reception      -         -         -  21 

40.  If  an  Infortune  be  Peregrine  -         -         -         -         -  22 

41.  Whether  an  Infortune  be  Significator  -         -         -         -  22 

42.  Whether  a  Fortune  be  Significator     -         -         -         -  22 

43.  If  Fortunes  and  Infortunes  be  in  Malignant  Places  -         -  22 

44.  If  the  Significator  be  in  his  own  House         -         -          -  22 

45.  Whether  Infortunes  are  in  Angles  of  the  Ascendant  -          -  23 

46.  Whether  the  Significator  be  a  Fortune  or  Infortune  -         -  23 

47.  Whether  the  Significator  be  in  his  proper  Light       -         -  23 

48.  Whether  if  an  Infortune  be  Significator,  the  evil  shall  be 

avoided       -          -         •■          -         -         -         -  23 

49.  Whether  one  of  the  Infortunes  be  Significator  -  -  24 
60.  To  consider  the  Ascendant  or  Moon  -         -         -         -  24 

51.  Whether  the  Significator  be  Cadent   -         -         -         -  24 

52.  When  the  three  Inferior  Planets  come  from  under  the 

Sun's  beams  -          -         -         -         -         -         -  25 

53.  Whether  the  Significator  be  under  the  Sun's  beams  -         -  25 

54.  Whether  one  of  the  Superior  Planets  is  12°  distant  from 

the  Sun       -         -          -         -         -         -         -  25 

55.  Whether  the  Significator  be  Peregrine          -         -         -  26 

56.  Whether  the  Significator  give  virtue  to  any  of  the  other 

Planets        -         -         -         -          -         -         -  26 

57.  Whether  the  Significator  be  in  the  VIII.  from  the  Ascendant  -  26 

58.  Whether  a  Significator  be  settled  in  the  Sign  wherein  he  is  -  27 

59.  Whether  the  Significator  be  15°  behind  the  cusp  of  an  Angle  28 

60.  Whether  the  Significator  be  in  a  Fixed,  Moveable,  or  Com- 

mon Sign     -         -         -         -         -         -         -  29 

61.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  and  Moon  be  with 

Dragon's  Head  or  Tail       -         -         -         -         -  29 

62.  Whether  the  Moon  be  void  of  course  -         -         -     •     -  30 

63.  Whether  she  be  far  from  joining  with  the  Infortunes          -  30 

64.  Whether  she  be  in  Cancer,  Taurus,  or  Pisces  -         -          -  30 

65.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  VII.  be  afflicted     -         -         -  30 

66.  When  the  Infortunes  threaten  ill       -          -         -         -  31 

67.  Whether  any  Eclipse  be  near  -         -         -         -         -  31 

68.  In  Questions  of  Sickness  whether  the  Lord  of  the  VII.  be 

free  -         -         -         -         -         -         -  -31 

69.  In  Journies  whether  the  Significators  be  equal        -         -  32 

70.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  New  or  Full  Moon  preventional, 

be  in  any  of  the  Angles  of  the  thing  enquired  about       -  32 

71.  Whereabout  the  Significator  happens  in  the  Figure  -         -  32 

72.  Whether  the  Question  be  of  a  Journey         -         -         -  34 

73.  Whether  it  signify  good  or  ill  -         -         -         -          -  34 

74.  Whether  a  Planet  be  Stationary  to  Retrogradation    -         -  34 

75.  Whether  the  Moon  be  afflicted          -         -         -         -  35 

76.  From  what  Planet  the  Moon  separates  and  to  whom  she  is 

joined  -         -         -         -         -         -  -35 

77.  Whether  the  Significator  or  the  Moon  be  in  opposition  to 

their  own  Houses    -         -         -         -         -         -  36 


THE  TABLE  OR  CONTENTS. 


xxiii 


PAGK 

78.  To  observe  the  Sign  signifying  the  thing  enquired  about    -  36 

79.  To  observe  whether  the  Significator  or  the  Moon  be  joined 

to  Fortunes  or  Infortunes  -         -         -    _      -         -  36 

80.  In  what  Sign  the  Significator  of  the  thing  enquired  after  is  -  36 

81.  Whether  the  Significator  be  in  an  Angle,  Succedent,  or 

Cadent  House        -         -         -         -         -         -  37 

82.  Whether  the  Significator  receive  virtue  from  any  Planet    -  37 

83.  Whether  the  Fortunes  and  Infortunes  be  equally  strong    -  37 

84.  Whether  the  Fortunes  be  strongest  -         -         -          -  37 

85.  Whether  Part  of  Fortune  fall  well  or  ill      -         -          -  37 

86.  Whether  an  Infortune  behold  the  Significator        -         -  38 

87.  To  observe  the  Novenary  of  the  Moon        -          -         -  38 

88.  What  Planet  the  Moon  separates  from        -         -         -  38 

89.  To  observe  the  Duodenary  of  the  Moon       -         -         -  38 

90.  Whether  the  Lords  of  the  Houses  where  the  Sun  and  Moon 

are,  etc.,  are  oriental         -         -         -         -         -  39 

91.  Whether  Mars  be  in  an  Angle         -         -         -         -  39 

92.  Whether  the  Significator  of  death  apply  to  the  Native 

Significator  -         -         -         -         -         -         -  39 

93.  Of  what  kind  of  thing  the  Question  is         -         -         -  39 

94.  Whether  the  Significator  be  Cadent  -         -         -         -  39 

95.  Whether  the  Planets  signifying  the  thing  enquired,  join 

mutually     -         -         -         -         -         -         -  40 

96.  Whether  the  Significator  and  Moon  be  in  Angles    -         -  40 

97.  In  what  climate  before  the  Question  is  proposed    -         -  40 

98.  Whether  the  meaning  of  the  Question  be  signified  by  con- 

junction or  aspect  -         -         -         -         -         -  41 

99.  What  the  issue  of  the  Question  will  be        -         -         -  42 

100.  To  observe  the  Benevolent  Fixed  Stars       -         -         -  43 

101.  Which  is  the  Killing  Planet  or  destroyer  of  Life,  etc.        -  44 

102.  How  to  find  what  it  signifies  -         -         -          -         -  45 

103.  In  what  House  the  Part  of  Fortune,  is        -         -         -  46 

104.  Whether  the  Significator  be  in  his  VII.  House       -         -  46 

105.  Whether  the  Infortune  unfortunate  be  in  the  VII.  -         -  46 

106.  Whether  ri  Fortune  fortunate  be  there        -         -         -  46 

107.  Whether  Mars  be  in  the  II.  or  X.     -         -         -         -  47 

108.  Whether  any  Planet  behold  two  Houses      -         -         -  47 

109.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  V.  be  in  the  VIL  afflicted          -  47 

110.  Whether  Scorpio  ascend       -         -         -         -         -  47 

111.  Whether  Dragon's  Tail  be  in  the  VII.        -         -         -  47 

112.  If  Virgo  ascend         -         -         -         -         -         -  48 

113.  Whether  any  of  the  Infortunes  be  in  the  IX.  afflicted        -  49 

114.  Wliether  a  Fortune  be  Lord  of  the  VIII.     -         -         -  49 

115.  Whether  the  VIII.  or  its  Lord  be  afflicted   -         -         -  49 

116.  Which  of  the  Houses  are  afflicted     -         -         -         -  49 

117.  In  which  Rouse  the  Dragon's  Tail  is          -         -         -  49 

118.  In  which  House  a  Fortune  fortunate  is       -         -         -  49 

119.  If  the  Lord  of  the  II.  be  in  the  VII.  -         -         -         -  50 

120.  Whether  any  of  the  Lords  of  the  III.,  IV.,  V.,  VL,  IX.,  X., 

XL,  or  Xil.  be  in  the  Seventh      -         -         -         -  50 


xxiv 


THE  TABLE  OR  CONTENTS. 


121.  Whether  the  Moon  be  in  the  VIIL    -         -         -         -  50 

122.  Whether  the  Part  of  Fortune  be  in  the  first  ten  degrees  of 

the  IV.  House        -         -         -          -         -         -  50 

123.  Whether  the  Sun  and  Moon  be  in  conjunction       -         -  51 

124.  To  observe  the  Significator  of  substance      -         -         -  52 

125.  To  note  what  sign  ascends     -         -         -         -         -  53 

126.  Whether  Mercury  be  Significator  in  a  Nativity      -         -  54 

127.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  at  Birth  be  an  Infortune  55 

128.  Whether  the  Ascendant  be  a  Sign  resembling  man  -         -  55 

129.  Whether  the  Moon  be  in  opposition  to  Sun  and  with 

nebulous  stars        -         -         -         -         -         -  55 

130.  Whether  the  Moon  be  with  Mercury-         -         -         -  56 

131.  Whether  in  a  man's  Nativity  the  Luminaries  be  in  Masculine 

Signs         -         -         -         -         -         -         -  57 

132.  Whether  Mars  be  corporally  joined  to  a  Fixed  Star  of  his 

own  nature  -         -         -         -         -         -         -  57 

133.  Whether  Gemini  or  Sagittarius  ascend        -         -         -  59 

134.  Whether  Mars  and  Venus  be  in  the  VI.       -         -         -  59 

135.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  and  the  Moon,  Jupiter, 

or  Venus  and  they  be  in  the  ascendant    -         -         -  60 

136.  Whether  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  in  their  Exaltations         -  60 

137.  Whether  Mercury  be  with  Saturn     -          -         -          -  60 

138.  Whether  in  a  Nativity  the  two  Infortunes  are  in  term  of  the 

IV.  House    -         -         -         -         -         -         -  61 

139.  In  what  House  the  Dragon's  Tail  is  -         -         -         -  61 

140.  Whether  the  Significator  be  weak    -         -         -          -  62 

141.  What  gifts  are  bestowed  by  the  Fixed  Stars          -         -  62 

142.  What  by  the  Planets  -  -  _       -         -  -  -67 

143.  To  observe  the  Method  of  judging  -  -  -  -  69 
-  144.  When  the  Significators  show  their  intent  obscurely-         -  71 

145.  Whether  in  a  Diurnal  Nativity  Cor  Leonis  oe  in  the 

Ascendant  -         -          -         -         -         -         -  71 

146.  To  observe  who  shall  partake  in  the  dominion  with  the 

Significators          -         -         -         -  .       -         -  72 


A  TABLE  OF  THE  APHORISMS  OF  JEROM 
CARDAN. 

1.  General  Aphorisms        -         -         -  • 

2.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Nativities 

3.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Revolutions 

4.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Diseases  - 

5.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Elections  - 

6.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Eclipses  and  Comets 

7.  Aphorisms  touching  Weather,  Meteors,  etc. 

8.  Aphorisms  relating  to  Husbandry 

9.  Aphorisms  relating  to  General  Accidents 

A  Table  of  50  of  the  principal  Fixed 


I 


NO.  OF 

APHORISMS.  PAGE 

23  73 

100  77 

*         20  88 

44  92 

16  97 

14  100 

12  101 

8  103 

8  104 

Stars. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF 
GUIDO  BONATUS. 


1.  The  First,  is  to  observe  what  it  is  that  moves  a  person 
to  propose  or  ask  a  question  of  an  Astrologer ;  where  we 
must  take  notice  of  three  motions  :  the  First,  of  the  mind, 
when  a  man  is  stirred  up  in  his  thoughts  and  hath  an 
intent  to  enquire ;  a  Second,  of  the  superior  and  celestial 
bodies  ;  so  that  they  at  that  time  imprint  on  the  thing- 
inquired  after,  what  shall  become  of  it ;  the  Third,  of  the 
free  will  which  disposes  him  to  the  very  act  of  enquiring  ; 
for  although  the  mind  be  moved  to  inquire,  'tis  not  enough, 
unless  the  superior  bodies  sympathize  therewith;  nor  is 
such  motion  of  the  stars  enough,  unless  by  the  election  of 
his  will  the  person  does  actually  enquire. 

2.  The  Second  Consideration  is  (what  we  hinted  at  before) 
the  method  or  manner  everyone  ought  to  observe  that 
inquires  of  an  Astrologer  ;  which  is,  that  when  he  intends  to 
take  an  artist's  judgment  of  things  past^  present,  or  to  come, 
he  should,  first,  with  a  devout  spirit,  pray  unto  the  Lord, 
from  whom  proceeds  the  success  of  every  lawful  enterprise, 
that  he  would  grant  him  the  knowledge  of  those  things  of 
the  truth  of  which  he  would  be  resolved  ;  and  then  let  him 
apply  himself  to  the  astrologer  with  a  serious  intent  of 
being  satisfied  in  some  certain  and  particular  doubt,  and 

1 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


this  not  on  trifling  occasions,  or  light  sudden  emotions, 
much  less  in  matters  base  or  unlawful,  as  many  ignorant 
people  use  to  do ;  but  in  matters  of  honest  importance,  and 
such  as  have  possessed  and  disturbed  his  mind  for  the  space 
of  a  day  and  night  or  longer ;  unless  in  sudden  accidents 
which  admit  not  of  delay. 

Note  by  Lilly. — Those  that  take  this  sober  course,  shall 
find  the  truth  in  what  they  enquire  after ;  but  whosoever 
do  otherwise,  deceive  both  themselves  and  the  artist;  for  a 
foolish  Querent  may  cause  a  wise  Respondent  to  err,  which 
brings  a  scandal  upon  Art  amongst  inconsiderate  people, 
whereas  the  Astrologer  is  not  blameable,  but  the  ignorant, 
silly  Querent. 

3.  The  Third,  is  to  consider  how  many  ways  Planets 
operate  upon  Inferior  Bodies  according  to  the  divers  Qualities 
of  their  motions  ;  there  being  Sixteen  different  ways  of  such 
their  operations  and  effects  in  all  things  that  are  either 
wholly  or  in  part  perfected  or  destroyed. 

4.  The  Fourth,  is  to  consider  particularly  these  several 
Sixteen  ways,  and  what  are  the  assisting  causes  that  help 
forward  things  to  perfection,  and  what  there  are  that 
destroy  things  after  they  are  perfected.  Now  of  these  the 
first  is  Profection,  or  an  advance  of  or  in,  things,  which  the 
philosophers  call  "  Alchecohol."  2.  Detriment,  which  they 
call  "  Aliber."  3.  Conjunction  or  Reversion,  which  they  call 
"  Alitifall."  4.  Separation,  which  the}^  call  "  Alnichirat." 
5.  Translation  of  light,  which  they  call  "  Annecad."  6.  Col- 
lection, which  they  call  "  Algemei."  7.  Prohibition,  which 
they  call  "  Almana."  8.  Reception,  called  "  Alcohol."  9. 
Being  void  of  course,  called Gastalcobal."  10.  Permission, 
called  Galaalocir."  11.  The  restoring  or  giving  of  virtue 
or  disposition,  called  "Alteat."  12.  The  withdrawing  of 
virtue,  called  "  Dalpha  Alchoa."    13.  The  with  drawee'  or 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  3 

driver  away  of  disposition,  called  "  Daffaredbit."  14.  Forti- 
tude, Alcoevah."  15.  Debility,  "Adirof."  The  16th  is 
the  state  of  the  Moon  called  Gnaymel/'  or  the  Moon 
ill-affected  ;  which  the  ancients  generally  hold  to  be  of  ill 
signification. 

5.  The  Fifth,  is  to  consider,  how  many  ways  the  Moon 
comes  to  be  so  ill-affected,  which  are  generally  reckoned  to 
be  Ten,  but  in  my  opinion  Seven  more  may  be  added, 
whereby  hindrances  and  damage  happen  in  all  Questions, 
Nativities,  Elections,  and  actions  whatsoever  ;  the  First  is, 
where  the  Moon  is  combust,  that  is  to  say  under  the  Sun's 
beams,  which  is  counted  from  15  degrees  of  the  body  of  the 
Sun  as  she  applies  to  him  to  12  degrees  distance  from  him 
as  she  is  separating  from  him ;  and  the  impediment  is 
greater  when  :;she  is  going  to  the  Sun  than  when  she  is 
going  from  him  ;  because  as  she  goes  off,  when  she  is  got 
five  degrees  distant,  she  is  said  to  be  escaped,  though  not 
wholly  freed.  As  when  a  fever  hath  left  a  man,  he  is  said 
to  be  recovered,  although  he  be  weak  and  faint,  because  he 
is  secure  now  that  he  shall  obtain  his  health  again.  The 
2nd  is  when  she  is  in  the  degrees  of  her  descensions,  that  is 
in  the  3rd  degree  of  Scorpio,  or  in  any  part  of  Scorpio  or 
Capricorn  or  injoined  with  any  Planet  that  is  in  her  or  its 
own  descensions,  as  if  she  be  joined  with  the  Sun,  who  is 
in  Scorpio  or  Capricorn  or  in  his  proper  descensipn,  viz., 
in  Aquary  or  Libra,  viz.,  in  its  19  th  degree  or  in  any  part 
of  Libra;  or  should  be  joined  with  Mars,  and  he  be  in 
Libra  or  Taurus,  or  in  the  28th  degree,  or  in  any  part  of 
Cancer ;  and  so  with  any  other  Planet  or  Planets  respec- 
tively. The  3rd  is  when  she  is  posited  in  any  of  the  com- 
bust degrees,  of  which  the  worst  are  :  those  12  degrees  which 
are  before  the  degree  which  is  directl}^  opposite  to  the 
degree  in  which  the  Sun  is,  wherever  she  shall  happen  lo 
be.  The  4th  is  when  she  is  in  conjunction,  opposition,  or 
square  to  either  of  the  Infortunes,  "  Saturn  "  or  "  Mars," 

1—2 


4 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


without  a  perfect  reception  ;  for  with  one  it  hinders  but 
little,  but  in  all  other  places  'tis  a  grand  impediment,  both 
in  the  said  aspect  and  also  in  corporal  conjunction  save  only 
where  the  Infortune  shall  have  two  of  his  smaller  dignities, 
as  with  Saturn  in  the  4  last  degrees  of  Aries  or  Gemini, 
in  each  of  which  he  has  a  Term  and  a  Triplicity  ;  or  with 
Mars  in  the  last  10  degrees  of  Pisces,  where  he  has  a  Face 
and  a  Triplicity  ;  and  so  in  any  other  sign  or  place.  The 
5th  is  when  she  is  with  the  Dragon's  Head  or  with  the 
Dragon's  Tail,  that  is,  within  twelve  degrees  of  either  of 
them,  because  that  is  the  place  where  she  is  eclipsed.  The 
6th  is  when  she  is  in  Gemini,  which  is  the  twelfth  from  her 
own  House.  The  7th  is  when  she  is  in  the  ends  of  signs, 
which  are  all  Terms  of  the  Infortunes,  except  the  last  G  de- 
grees of  Leo,  which  belong  to  Jupiter;  but  in  the  first  eight 
she  is  weakened  because  they  are  the  Terms  of  Saturn.  If  it 
be  objected  by  the  same  reason  she  must  be  impedited  like- 
wise in  the  first  6  degrees  of  Cancer,  since  they  are  Terms 
of  Mars,  I  answer  no,  because  Cancer  is  her  own  House  and 
greatest  Fortitude.  The  8th  is  when  she  is  in  the  6th, 
8th,  9th,  or  12th  Houses  (not  in  reception  with  the  Ascen- 
dent), or  joined  to  any  planet  that  is  in  any  of  them  or 
posited  in  the  Third  House,  because  it  is  cadent  from 
angles;  yet  because  the  same  is  said  to  be  her  joy  (or  that 
slie  delights  therein),  she  is  not  afflicted  there  so  much  as 
in  other  Cadent  Houses.  The  9th  is  when  she  is  between 
the  15th  degree  of  Libra  and  the  15th  degree  of  Scorpio, 
which  30  degrees  are  called  the  Combust  way.  The  10th 
when  she  is  void  of  course^  that  is,  not  joined  to  any  planet 
b}^  body  or  aspect_,  or  in  that  condition  when  they  call  her 
Feral  or  Desart,  that  is,  in  a  place  where  she  has  not  any 
dignity.  The  11th  when  she  is  slow  of  course,  because  then 
she  may  be  compared  to  a  Planet  Retrograde.  The  12th 
when  she  is  in  want  of  lights  so  that  no  part  or  very  little 
of  her  is  seen,  which  happens  about  the  end  of  the  lunar 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


5 


month.  The  J  3th  when  she  is  besieged  by  the  two  Infor- 
tunes  impecliting  her.  The  14th  if  she  be  in  Azimene 
degrees.  The  loth  if  in  Pitted  degrees.  The  16th  if  in 
Smoky  degrees.  The  17th  and  last  is  when  she  is  posited 
in  those  degrees  which  are  called  dark.  To  know  and  dis- 
tinguish all  which  you  have  Tables  commonly  in  most 
Books  of  Astrology. 

6.  The  Sixth  Consideration,  Is  to  regard  another  manner 
whereby  planets  are  debilitated  or  weakened  and  afflicted, 
not  much  different  from  the  former,  which  comes  to  pass 
Ten  ways.  The  lst_,  when  a  planet  is  Cadent  from  Angles 
or  from  the  Ascendant,  so  that  he  does  not  behold  the  same. 
The  2nd,  when  a  Planet  is  Retrograde.  The  3rd,  if  they  be 
combust,  that  is,  within  15  degrees  before  or  after  the  Sun  ; 
the  lower  Planets  are  more  debilitated,  being  behind  the 
Sun,  and  the  less  before  him,  when  they  are  direct ;  but 
when  retrograde  the  contrary.  4.  When  any  of  them  is  in 
Opposition,  Corporal  Conjunction,  or  Square  of  either  or 
both  the  Infortunes  without  Reception.  5.  When  they 
are  besieged  by  the  Infortunes,  so  as  to  separate  from  one 
and  be  joined  to  another,  without  perfect  reception  of 
House,  Exaltation,  or  two  of  the  smaller  Dignities,  which 
are  Term,  Triplicit}^,  and  Face.  6.  When  a  Planet  is  joined 
to  another  in  his  Declension  or  Fall,  that  is,  in  Opposition 
to  its  own  House  or  Exaltation.  7.  When  it  is  joined  to  a 
Planet  Cadent  from  the  Ascendant,  or  separates  from  a 
Planet  that  did  receive  him,  and  is  joined  to  another  that 
doth  not.  8.  When  a  Planet  is  Peregrine,  that  is,  in  a  place 
where  he  hath  not  any  Dignity;  or  being  one  of  the 
Superiors  is  followed  by  the  Sun,  or  being  of  the  Inferiors 
when  it  follows  the  Sun.  9.  When  a  Planet  is  with  the 
Head  or  Tail  of  the  Dragon,  without  Latitude.  10.  When 
a  planet  weakens  itself,  that  is,  when  it  is  in  the  Seventh 
House  from  its  own.  Feral,  or  not  in  ,  Reception.  These  are 
the  Impediments  of  the  Planets,  that  cause  Hindrances, 


6 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


delaj^s,  and  mischiefs  in  Nativities,  Questions,  Elections, 
etc.  ;  all  which  thou  oughtest  to  be  well  acquainted  with. 
There  are  some  more  that  seem  necessar}^  to  be  known,  but 
to  avoid  tediousness  and  confusion  I  shall  at  present  omit 
them. 

7.  The  Seventh  Consideration,  Is  to  beware  of  those  cases 
v/herein  the  Astrologer  is  subject  to  err  and  mistake ;  of 
which  the  learned  have  named  four:  1.  When  the  Querent 
is  so  silly  that  he  knows  not  how  to  ask,  nor  what  he  would 
have.  2.  When  the  time  for  which  the  figure  is  erected  is 
mistaken.  3.  When  the  Artist  knows  not  whether  the  Sun 
be  gone  off  the  line  of  the  Mid-heaven,  or  still  upon  it ;  or 
be  behind  or  before  it.  4.  When  the  Fortunes  and  Infor- 
tunes  shall  be  of  equal  strength ;  at  which  time  thou  there- 
fore oughtest  not  to  receive  any  Question.  But,  in  my 
opinion,  there  may  well  be  added  yet  three  ways  more, 
wherein  the  Astrologer  will  be  subject  to  err  :  1.  When 
the  Querent  comes  only  to  try  him,  or  put  a  trick  upon  him, 
as  many  do,  saying,  ^'  Let  us  go  to  such  an  Astrologer,  and 
ask  him  such  a  thing,  and  see  if  he  can  tell  us  the  truth  or 
not."  Just  as  the  Jews  propounded  questions  to  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  not  so  much  to  be  resolved,  as  to  tempt  and 
ensnare  Him.  2.  Wherein  the  Artist  will  be  liable  to  err, 
is  when  the  Querent  does  not  ask  out  of  a  serious  or 
settled  intention,  as  some  do  when  they  meet  an  Astrologer 
by  chance  or  go  to  him  on  other  business  ;  on  a  sudden 
they  think  of  something,  and  so  ask,  as  it  were  by-the-bye  ; 
wherein  'tis  a  thousand  to  one  but  mistakes  happen.  But 
thou  mayest  be  ready  to  say,  "  How  shall  I  know  whether 
the  Querent  come  out  of  a  solid  intention^  or  only  to  try 
me  ?"  To  which  I  answer,  that  it  seems  a  very  abstruse 
and  difficult  point,  perfectly  to  find  out;  but  this  I  have 
often  experienced  and  found  true,  viz.,  I  observed  the  hour 
of  the  Question,  and  if  the  Ascendant  then  happened  very 
near  the  end  of  one  sign  and  beginning  of  another,  so  that 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  7 

it  seemed  as  between  both  ;  I  said  they  did  not  ask  seriously, 
or  that  they  came  to  try  me  ;  and  I  have  had  many  tliat 
have  thereupon  confessed  what  I  said  to  be  true,  and  began 
to  think  that  I  knew  more  than  before  they  believed.  For 
in  such  cases  I  used  to  say,  "  Pray,  friend,  do  not  trouble  me 
unless  you  ask  seriously,  for  I  suspect  that  you  would  put 
a  trick  upon  me,  by  not  proposing  this  Question  as  you 
ought ;  however,  if  you  will  give  me  trouble  for  your 
pleasure,  be  pleased  to  give  me  likewise  satisfaction  for 
my  pains  "  ;  and  immediately,  if  there  were  any  deceit 
intended,  away  they  went.  Another,  viz.,  a  third  way 
whereby  an  Astrologer  may  err,  is  when  the  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  and  the  Lord  of  the  Hour  are  not  the  same,  nor 
of  the  same  Triplicity,  or  be  not  of  the  same  Complexion 
with  the  Ascendant ;  for  then  the  Question  is  not  Radical, 
as  I  have  frequently  found  by  experience.  And  this  I  have 
recited,  that  thou  may'st  know  for  what  persons  thou 
should'st  undertake  to  give  judgment;  for  as  one  says, 
*'  The  issue  of  the  thing  is  according  to  the  solicitude  of  the 
Querent,  and  as  he  comes  in  necessity,  as  sad,  thoughtful, 
and  hoping  that  thou  art  able  and  knowest  how  to  satisfy 
him  the  truth  of  the  matter ;  and  in  such  cases  thou  may'st 
securely  venture  upon  the  question." 

8.  The  Eighth  Consideration  is.  To  mind  how  many  of 
the  aforesaid  manners  or  points  necessary  to  be  used  and 
heeded  in  giving  Judgments  thou  hast  to  consider;  and 
they  are  thirty,  that  is  to  say,  sixteen  impediments  of  the 
Moon,  ten  of  the  other  Planets;  as  hath  been  said;  and 
besides  all  those  the  Planets'  several  joys,  which  are  four.  Of 
which  the  first  is  the  House  which  each  Planet  does  delight 
in,  as  Mercury  in  the  Ascendant,  the  Moon  in  the  third, 
Venus  in  the  fifth,  Mars  in  the  sixth,  the  Sun  in  the  ninth, 
Jupiter  in  the  eleventh,  Saturn  in  the  twelfth.  The 
second  is,  when  a  Planet  is  in  a  sign  he  delights  in,  as 
Saturn  in  Aquarius^  J  upiter  in  Sagittary,  Mars  in  Scorpio, 


8 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


Sol  in  Leo,  Venus  in  Taurus,  Mercury  in  Virgo,  and  the 
Moon  in  Cancer.  The  third  is  when  Diurnal  Planets,  as 
Saturn,  Jupiter,  Sol,  and  Mercury,  are  in  Diurnal  Houses 
in  the  East  and  Oriental  of  the  Sun  near  the  Horoscope  ; 
and  the  Nocturnal  Planets,  as  Mars,  Venus,  Luna,  and 
Mercury,  are  in  Nocturnal  Houses  in  the  West  and  Occi- 
dental of  the  Sun  ;  especially  near  the  cusp  of  the  seventh. 
The  fourth  is  when  the  three  Superiors,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  or 
Mars,  are  in  Masculine  Quarters  ;  which  are  counted  from  the 
cusp  of  the  tenth  House  to  the  cusp  of  the  Ascendant,  and 
from  the  cusp  of  the  fourth  House  to  the  cusp  of  the  seventh 
House;  and  when  the  Feminines,  viz.,  Venus  or  the  Moon, 
are  in  Feminine  Quarters,  which  are  from  the  cusp  of  the 
Ascendant  to  the  cusp  of  the  fourth  House,  and  from  the 
cusp  of  the  seventh  to  the  cusp  of  the  tenth.  As  for 
Mercury,  he  delights  when  with  Masculine  Planets  in  Mas- 
culine Quarters,  but  with  Feminine  Planets  in  Feminine. 

9.  The  Ninth  Consideration  is.  To  take  notice  of  tlie 
several  ways,  as  well  secret  as  manifest,  good  and  evil, 
whereby  things  are  helped  or  hindered  to  be  done  or  not 
done,  and  of  these  there  are  one-and-twenty  in  number. 
1.  A  most  strong  secret  Helper.  2.  A  very  strong  secret 
Helper.  3.  A  strong  Helper.  4.  A  weak  secret  Helper. 
5.  A  weaker  secret  Helper.  6.  A  most  weak  secret  Helper. 
7.  A  most  strong  manifest  Helper.  8.  A  very  strong 
manifest  Helper.  9.  A  strong  manifest  Helper.  10.  A  weak 
manifest  Helper.  11.  A  weaker  manifest  Helper.  12.  A 
most  weak  manifest  Helper.  13.  A  most  strong  secret 
Hinderer.  14.  A  very  strong  secret  Hinderer.  15.  A 
strong  secret  Hinderer.  16.  A  weak  secret  Hinderer.  17. 
A  weaker  secret  Hinderer.  18.  A  most  weak  secret  Hin- 
derer. 19.  A  most  strong  manifest  Hinderer.  20.  A  very 
strong  manifest  Hinderer ;  and  21.  A  strong  manifest  Hin- 
derer. All  which  we  shall  treat  particularly,  the  same  being 
a  secret  of  secrets.    In  the  judicial  part  of  Astrology  which 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


9 


the  Ancients  did  not  regard,  nor  have  said  anything  plainly 
of  it  that  I  find,  save  only  that  Haly "  seems  to  have 
touched  a  little  upon  it  in  his  Exposition  of  the  23rd  of 
Ptolomy's  Centiloquium;  nor  do  I  believe  they  omitted 
those  things  out  of  ignorance,  but  rather  through  disuse  or 
fear  of  being  too  tedious,  or  burdening  the  minds  of  their 
Headers  or  Auditors :  For  they  were  wont  to  judge,  accord- 
ing as  they  found  the  Planets  disposed  in  Houses  and  Signs, 
their  Fortitudes  and  Debilities,  together  with  the  Part  of 
Fortune,  and  some  few  other  things.  But  thou  oughtest  to 
consider  in  thy  Judgments,  not  only  what  they  did,  but 
also  all  other  circumstances  that  thou  canst;  for  when  thou 
dost  erect  a  figure,  thou  should'st  first  find  the  Significator  of 
the  thing  enquired  after,  or  to  be  undertaken,  and  see  if  any 
of  the  fixed  stars  of  his  own  Nature  be  in  either  of  his 
Houses,  or  in  his  Exaltation,  or  in  conjunction  with  him  to 
a  minute ;  for  then  such  star  shall  so  far  help  the  signifi- 
cator, that  the  thing  shall  be  accomplished  and  efiected,  even 
beyond  the  Querent's  hopes ;  and  this  is  a  most  strong  secret 
Helper :  For  the  Querent  may  well  wonder  how  it  comes 
to  pass.  Now,  if  the  same  star  should  be  in  the  same  degree 
with  the  Significator  from  one  minute  to  15'  before  him 
or  5'  behind  him,  it  will  still  help  him,  but  not  so  much  ; 
and  this  we  call  a  very  strong  secret  Helper;  but  if  it  be 
with  him  in  the  same  degree,  but  above  16  minutes  distance 
and  within  50',  it  will  somewhat  help,  yet  this  less ;  and 
this  we  call  in  the  Positive  degree  only  a  strong  secret 
Helper.  If  it  be  in  the  same  degree  with  the  Significator, 
in  a  place  where  he  has  two  of  his  smaller  Dignities,  in  the 
very  same  minute,  or  within  16  minutes,  it  will  help  him 
yet  less,  and  then  'tis  a  weak  secret  Helper;  from  16'  to 
50'  still  less,  and  then  'tis  a  weaker  secret  Helper ;  but  if 
it  be  with  the  Significator  in  a  place  where  he  has  no 
dignities  at  all  it  will  still  help,  but  as  it  were  insensibly  ; 
and  this  we  call  a  most  weak  secret  Helper.    The  like  we 


10 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


may  say  on  the  contrary  of  those  things  that  prejudice, 
frustrate^  and  hinder  business :  For  if  a  Planet  which  is  a 
Significator  of  anything,  being  in  a  place  where  he  has  not 
any  Dignities,  shall  be  joined  with  one  of  the  Fixed  Stars  of 
a  contrary  nature,  it  will  weaken  him  and  not  suffer  the 
thing  to  come  to  pass ;  although  otherwise  by  the  Figure  it 
seemed  never  so  probable  :  so  that,  for  want  of  heeding  this, 
the  Artist  often  gets  discredit,  and  raises  a  scandal  on  the 
Art  itself  amongst  the  ignorant;  and  this  is  a  most  strong- 
secret  Hinderer ;  whereas  if  the  same  star  be  remote  above 
16  minutes  from  the  Significator,  it  will  weaken  him,  but 
not  altogether  so  much ;  whence  it  may  be  called  only  a 
very  strong  secret  Hinderer.  And  so  downwards  through  all 
degrees  in  the  same  manner  as  we  said  of  the  Helpers  or 
Assistant  Causes  respectively. 

Of  the  several  21  Modes  aforesaid,  which  are  most  strong 
Helpers,  etc.,  and  ivhich  strongest  obstructs. 

The  several  Modes  before  mentioned  are  thus  to  be 
known  and  distinguished  : — A  most  strong  manifest  Helper 
or  Adjuvant  cause,  is  when  the  Planet  which  is  Significator 
of  a  thing,  is  in  his  own  House ;  in  an  Angle  on  the  very 
minute  of  the  Cusp,  direct,  swift  of  course,  in  reception,  and 
free  from  all  af?liction  and  impediment ;  which  most  seldom 
happens. 

A  very  strong  manifest  Helper,  is  when  the  Significator  is 
in  his  House  or  Exaltation  in  an  Angle  within  a  degree  or 
two  of  the  Cusp,  free  from  impediment,  and  in  Reception, 
which  very  seldom  happens. 

A  strong  manifest  Helper,  is  when  the  Significator  is  in 
an  Angle  in  his  House  or  Exaltation,  within  3  degrees 
before  the  Cusp,  or  5°  after  it. 

A  weak  manifest  Helper,  is  where  a  Planet  is  in  two  of 
his  lesser  Dignities  in  an  Angle  within  5  degrees  before  or 
15°  after  it ;  or  is  in  his  House,  or  Exaltation,  in  asuccedent 
House  free  from  Affliction. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  11 

A  weaker  open  Helper,  is  vA\en  the  Significator  is  in  liis 
own  House  or  Exaltation,  or  two  of  his  lesser  Dignities,  but 
in  a  cadent  House  of  the  Figure,  yet  beholding  the  Ascen- 
dant. A  most  weak  open  Helper  is  when  the  Significator  is 
in  some  of  his  greater  Dignities  or  two  of  his  lesser,  not 
beholding  the  Ascendant :  or  in  one  of  his  lesser  Dignities  ; 
only  beholding  the  same,  or  joined  to  a  Planet  that  beholds 
the  same,  and  has  some  Dignities  therein. 

A  most  strong  open  Hinderer  is  when  the  Significator  is 
in  a  place  where  he  hath  no  Dignity,  no  delight,  is  not 
received ;  besieged  by  the  Two  Infortunes,  Cadent  from  an 
Angle,  and  from  the  Ascendant :  and  so  much  the  worse  if 
joined  with  any  of  the  Fixed  Stars,  of  a  mischiev^ous 
nature,  etc. : 

There  may  be  other  both  adjuvant  and  obstructing 
causes,  besides  what  we  have  mentioned,  both  open  and 
secret  ;  proceeding  from  the  conjunctions  of  Planets  and 
their  Aspects,  too  tedious  here  to  discourse  of.  Nor  shall  I 
here  enlarge  on  all  those  before  mentioned,  but  must  assure 
thee  that  this  ninth  consideration,  carefully  observed,  will 
be  of  great  use  in  raising  a  true  and  wary  judgment ;  espe- 
cially if  thou  hast  always  a  diligent  eye  to  the  Moon ;  for 
she  of  all  the  Planets  has  the  greatest  similitude  and 
correspondence  with  inferior  things,  both  in  general  and 
particular  :  as  well  the  species  of  the  kinds  as  the  indi- 
viduals of  the  species;  with  winds;  to  pass  by  her  daily- 
effects  which  she  causes  in  all  things  here,  and  frequent 
revolutions  about  the  Elements  and  Elementary  Bodies  by- 
reason  of  the  nearness  of  her  Orb  to  the  Earth,  and  smaller 
circle  than  any  other  Planet ;  so  that  she  seems  a  Mediatrix 
between  Superior  and  Inferior  Bodies. 

And  as  we  see  that  in  the  New  Moon  she  appeals  small, 
thin,  and  little,  but  afterwards  her  light  gradually  increases, 
till  all  that  part  of  her  body  towards  us  becomes  replenished 
with  lustre ;  and  then  again  it  decays  by  insensible  degrees 


12 


THE  ASTROLOGEll'S  GUIDE. 


till  she  totally  disappears:  just  so  do  all  bodies  both  of 
things  Rational,  Irrational,  and  Vegetative :  as  men  grow 
until  they  are  completed  to  their  determinate  stature,  and 
then  droop  and  decline  continually  till  their  life  is  ended ; 
and  so  of  all  o|her  things.  Hence  tis  necessary  to  make 
the  Moon  concerned  in  the  signification  of  every  Question, 
Nativity,  Enterprise  and  Business,  and  her  good  condition 
to  show  the  good  issue  of  the  thing  :  and  so  on  the  contrary. 
For  her  Virtue  and  Power  is  such  and  so  great,  that  if  the 
Lord  of  the  Ascendant  or  other  Significator  of  a  business 
be  so  weak  and  afflicted  that  he  cannot  bring  it  about  and 
complete  it  as  he  ought :  if  she  be  but  strong  it  shall,  not- 
withstanding, be  accomplished.  For  she  is  the  School- 
mistress of  all  things  ;  the  Bringer-down  of  all  the  Planets' 
influences,  and  a  kind  of  an  ''internuncio^''  between  them, 
carrying  their  virtues  from  one  to  the  other,  by  receiving 
the  disposition  of  one  planet  and  bearing  it  to  another. 
And  some  have  thought  that  she  does  this  at  all  times,  of 
which  opinion  was  that  Tyrant  Cylinus  de  Romano,  viz.. 
That  when  she  separates  from  one  Planet,  she  takes  the 
virtue  and  carries  it  to  another,  committing  the  same  to  the 
first  that  she  can  meet  with.  And  some  have  imagined 
that  "  Zael "  said  the  same  ;  but  his  meaning  was  not  abso- 
lutely so ;  for  he  believed  That  the  Moon  did  bear  what 
was  committed  to  her;  but  if  it  were  not  so  given  or  com- 
mitted to  her  she  could  not  carry  anything  to  any  ;  to 
which  I  assent :  for  when  the  Moon  is  joined  to  any  planet 
that  receives  her,  then  that  planet  commits  its  disposition 
to  her,  who  carries  it  with  her  and  bestows  it  on  that 
planet  whom  she  first  meets  with  in  any  of  her  dignities, 
and  not  to  another:  according  to  that  Aphorism, — "A 
planet  gives  nothing  in  a  place,  where  he  has  promised 
nothing." 

10.  The  Tenth  Consideration,  Is  warily  to  observe  what 
Fixed  Stars  may  either  help  or  hinder  the   matter  in 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


13 


question ;  for  they  have  oftentimes  great  power,  and  lead 
the  Astrologer  sometimes  into  error ;  and  let  tlie  Artist  be 
sure  to  consider  the  places  of  the  Fixed  Stars,  as  they  are 
in  the  present  age  carefully  reduced.* 

11.  The  Eleventh  Consideration,  Is  to  take  notice  of  the 
Malevolent  Planets,  and  what  they  signify ;  for  Saturn  and 
Mars  are  naturally  bad,  Saturn  for  excess  of  cold,  and  Mars 
for  excess  of  heat ;  not  that  either  of  them  is  really  hot  or 
cold,  but  virtually  so ;  and  these  are  their  effects.  And  so 
they  signify  evil  and  damage  and  hindrance,  unless  they 
receive  the  Significator  or  the  Moon  by  House,  Exaltation, 
or  two  of  their  smaller  Dignities ;  or  shall  themselves  be 
Significators ;  for  then  they  will  bridle  in  their  malice,  and 
not  weaken  or  hinder  him  whom  they  receive,  with  what 
aspect  soever  they  behold  him ;  but  if  they  do  not  receive, 
their  malice  is  increased  ;  and  so  much  the  more  if  they  be 
in  Opposition  or  Square ;  for  in  Sextile  or  Trine  the  mischief 
is  less.  Yet  "  Zael "  seems  to  say  That  the  Infortunes  lay 
aside  or  restrain  their  malice,  where  they  are  in  Trine  or 
Sextile  ;  but  his  meaning  was  only  that  they  were  not 
tlien  so  violent,  and  intended  not  that  their  malice  was 
wholly  abated. 

12.  The  Twelfth  Consideration,  Is  to  behold  the  Fortunes, 
and  see  what  they  signify ;  for  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
Fortunes  by  Nature,  and  being  temperate,  are  said  to  be 
without  any  malice,  because  they  do  hurt  to  none,  unless 
now  and  then  by  accident;  wdiich  is  beside  their  intention 
and  very  seldom  ;  for  they  make  their  impressions  temper- 
ately and  profitably,  and  always  endeavour  to  help  both 
their  own  and  others,  whether  they  receive  them  or  not ; 
but  so  much  the  better  if  they  receive  them  ;  and  their  Trine 
or  Sextile  is  better  and  more  advantageous  than  their 
Square,  and  their  Square  than  their  Oppositions. 

*  The  longitudes  of  the  fixed  stars  increase  at  the  annual  rate  of 


14  THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 

13.  The  Thirteenth  Consideration,  is  to  regard  the  Sun 
and  his  Significators,  for  he  is  also  called  a  fortune,  and  so, 
whatever  aspect  he  shall  be  beheld  by^  unless  it  be  Opposi- 
tion ;  but  by  Conjunction  he  becomes  an  Infortune,  because 
then  he  renders  every  star  that  is  so  in  Conjunction  with 
him,  combust  and  unfortunate  ;  unless  the  same  shall  be  in 
the  heart  of  the  Sun,  and  there  every  star  is  fortified. 

14.  The  Fourteenth  Consideration,  is  to  mind  Mercury  and 
the  Moon,  and  what  Planets  they  are  joined  with  ;  because 
they  will  have  the  same  significations  with  those  with 
whom  they  are  so  joined;  being  of  a  convertible  nature. 

15.  The  Fifteenth  Consideration,  Is  to  regard  the  several 
ways  in  general  whereby  Planets  make  impressions  on  these 
inferior  things^  which  are  two,  one  good  and  the  other  bad  ; 
for  the  Fortunes  have  power  of  imprinting  good  naturally, 
and  the  Infortunes  as  naturally  shower  down  ill  impres- 
sions ;  whence  thou  may  est,  wherever  thou  seest  the 
Fortunes,  hope  for  good ;  and  when  thou  beh oldest  the 
Malevolents,  fear  mischief,  unless  the  same  be  restrained 
as  aforesaid. 

16.  The  Sixteenth  Consideration  is  to  take  notice 
whether  the  Planet  that  is  Significator  of  anything,  be 
afflicted  by  either  of  the  Malevolents  ;  which  is  when  one  of 
them  casts  his  rays  upon  the  rays  of  such  Significators, 
according  to  the  quantity  of  their  Orbs  ;  And  whilst  he  so 
continues  with  his  rays  or  light  under  those  of  the  Male- 
volent, such  Significator  is  said  to  be  impedited,  hindered 
or  afflicted,  till  the  Malevolent  have  passed  him;  and 
"  Zael "  says,  "  After  the  ill  planet  has  passed  the  Planet  he 
did  afflict,  one  whole  degree,,  the  Planet  shall  be  said  to 
be  freed  from  him."*  But  I  rather  think  that  after  the 
Malevolent  is  passed  him  one  minute^  he  may  be  said  to  be 
free  and  excepted  ;*  for  afterwards  he  can  only  frighten 
him.    True  it  is  he  raises  a  greater  fear  when  he  is  passed 

*  This  can  only  apply  to  Horary  Astrology. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


15 


him  only  one  minute,  than  when  he  is  gone  by  a  whole 
degree  ;  but  yet  even  then  it  is  such  a  kind  of  fear  as  is  not 
altogether  without  some  glimmering  of  hope.  As  thus,  One 
intending  to  go  into  a  Battle,  inquires  whether  he  shall 
return  from  thence  safe  and  sound  or  not  ?  And  the 
Ascendant  is  Gemini  13  degrees,  and  Mercury  in  the  7th 
degree  and  54  min.  of  Aquary,  in  the  9th  joined  with 
Saturn,  who  is  likewise  in  7  degrees  53  min.  of  Aquary,  so 
that  Mercury  is  now  separated  from  Saturn,  who  was  Lord 
of  the  House  of  Death,  one  minute ;  whence  it  appears  that 
he  should  have  died  in  that  engagement  by  reason  of  the 
Conjunction,  and  was  in  peril  of  death  and  a  kind  of 
desperate  fear  that  he  should  be  slain  by  his  enemies  and 
shall  be  pursued  by  them  so  that  he  shall  seem  not  able  to 
escape,  and  they  shall  often  lay  hands  on  him,  but  at  last 
he  shall  get  from  them  and  make  his  escape  ;  even  beyond 
his  own  hopes ;  and  all  because  Mercury  is  separated  from 
Saturn ;  and  "  Zael  "  saith,  "  That  if  a  Malevolent  planet 
that  would  hinder  any  business  be  cadent  from  the  Ascen- 
dent so  that  he  cannot  behold  it,  he  cannot  really  hinder 
the  matters;  but  only  puts  the  persons  concerned  into 
terrors  and  frights  about  it." 

17.  The  Seventeenth  Consideration,  Is  to  view  whether 
the  Planet  that  is  Significator,  be  safe  and  prosperous,  that 
is,  free  from  an}^  affliction  from  the  Infortunes ;  and  one  of 
the  Fortunes  casts  his  beams  or  light  on  the  beams  of  such 
Significator ;  for  then  shall  that  Planet  be  said  to  be  safe 
and  guarded  till  the  Fortune  is  passed  by  the  space  of  one 
minute,  and  signifies  the  perfection  of  the  thing.  But  after 
he  has  passed  him  one  minute,  it  will  not  be  perfected  or 
accomplished ;  for  it  only  raises  hopes ;  as  (we  said)  the 
Malevolent  in  the  like  case  could  do  nothing,  but  create 
fear.  Yet  is  such  a  hope  as  the  Querent  will  believe  and 
fancy  himself  as  it  were  certain  ;  yet  not  without  something 
of  doubt :  as  for  example,  A  Question  is  proposed  of  some 


16 


THE  ASTROLOGER  S  GUIDE. 


weighty  and  difficult  business,  whether  it  will  be  done  and 
brought  to  pass  or  not  ?  and  17  degrees  of  Scorpio  Ascends, 
and  Mars  is  12  degrees  13  min.  of  Taurus,  and  Yenus  in  12 
degrees  and  14  min.  of  Capricorn,  so  that  Venus  is  joined  to 
Mars  by  a  Trine,  and  receives  him  in  her  House,  who  like- 
w^ise  receives  her  in  his  Exaltation ;  so  that  the  Querent 
thinks,  and  all  others  concerned  verily  believe,  that  it  would 
be  accomplished  by  that  aspect  of  perfect  friendship ;  in 
which  flattering  hopes  they  continue  till  Venus  hath  passed 
the  Aspect  of  Mars  one  whole  degree  ;  but  at  last  the  busi- 
ness comes  to  just  nothing  at  all,  because  Venus  was  past 
Mars  one  minute  at  the  time  of  tlie  question  proposed  : 
Yet  may  a  thing  possibly  in  such  a  case  be  brought  to  pass, 
but  not  without  extraordinary  labour  and  trouble.  And 
here  likewise  "Zael"  affirms,  "That  if  the  Fortune  be 
cadent  from  the  Ascendant,  so  that  it  cannot  behold  the 
same,  it  only  flatters  with  splendid  hopes,  but  never  com- 
pletes the  business." 

18.  The  Eighteenth  Consideration,  Is  to  take  notice  when 
a  Planet  is  in  the  Angles  of  the  Infortunes,  for  unless  these 
receive  him  there,  he  shall  be  said  to  be  in  an  ill  condition, 
and  in  straits  and  troubles ;  as  a  man  on  whom  some  have 
made  an  assault;  who  has  many  to  combat  with  and  none 
to  assist  and  take  his  part ;  or  like  one  that  strives  against 
the  stream,  or  falls  into  a  deep  pool,  and  knows  not  how  to 
swim ;  and  yet  by  thrusting  out  his  hands  and  feet,  may 
obtain  the  bank  and  escape ;  though  this  seldom  happens. 
Now  a  Planet  is  said  to  be  in  the  Angles  of  a  Malevolent, 
when  the  Malevolent  or  Infortune,  viz.,  Saturn  or  Mars,  is  in 
one  sign,  and  the  other  Planet  in  the  fourth,  seventh,  or 
tenth  from  him :  as  if  Mars  be  in  Aries,  and  Mercury  in 
Cancer,  Libra,  or  Capricorn,  he  is  said  to  be  in  his  Angles  : 
understand  the  like  of  their  Corporal  Conjunction.  But  if 
there  be  a  Reception,  he  does  not  afflict ;  for  reception  abates 
all  malice,  as  we  ha^ve  said  elsewhere. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


17 


19.  The  Nineteenth  Consideration  is,  To  behold  the  Moon 
if  she  be  "  void  of  course,"  for  then  it  signifies  an  impedi- 
ment to  the  thing  in  question  :  it  will  not  come  to  a  good 
end,  nor  be  accomplished  ;  but  the  Querent  shall  be  forced 
to  desist  with  shame  and  loss. 

20.  The  Twentieth  Consideration  is,  To  observe  whether 
the  Moon  or  Significator  be  joined  to  any  of  the  Planets,  for 
thence  you  must  derive  your  judgment  of  what  is  like  to 
happen  in  the  business.  Take  notice  therefore  whether  the 
planet  to  which  the  Moon  or  Significator  joins,  receives 
them ;  for  then  there  will  be  a  good  laudable  end :  and  the 
matter  will  be  accomplished  with  success,  if  the  receiver  be 
a  Fortune.  But  if  there  be  no  reception,  yet  if  the  Moon 
or  Significator  shall  give  virtue  to  that  planet,  the  thing 
will  still  come  to  pass.  But  if  it  be  an  Infortune,  though 
they  do  not  give  him  virtue,  yet  without  a  reception  it  will 
not  do  ;  but  v/ith  a  reception,  if  he  be  not  afflicted,  it 
signifies  a  good  end  of  the  matter,  though  not  without  much 
labour  and  tediousness. 

21.  The  Twenty-first  Consideration  is,  To  see  from  what 
planet  the  Moon  separates :  for  that  signifies  what  is  past  of 
the  business :  as  from  a  Fortune  the  good,  from  an  Infortune 
the  ill  that  hath  been. 

22.  The  Twenty-second  Consideration  is,  To  note  which  of 
the  planets  the  Moon  is  now  joined  to,  for  that  signifies 
what  is  now  present ;  and  from  thence  we  must  judge  of  the 
present  state  of  any  matter. 

23.  The  Twenty- third  Consideration  is.  To  behold  to 
whom  the  Moon  is  now  joining,*  so  as  her  Conjunction  is 
not  yet  completed  :  for  that  signifies  what  is  to  come  :  where- 
fore if  thou  wouldst  judge  of  a  thing,  which  as  yet  is  not,  but 
'tis  hoped  will  hereafter  be  brought  to  pass,  'tis  necessary  then 
thou  shouldst  see  to  whom  the  Moon  will  next  join;  and 
according  to  her  Significations  judge  whether  good  or  evil. 

*  Or  applying  by  Aspect. 

2 


18 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


24.  The  Twenty-fourth  Consideration  is,  To  note  whether 
the  planet  who  is  Significator,  be  in  his  Declension,  for  then 
it  causes  a  hindrance  to  everything  thereby  signified,  and 
trouble  and  grief  about  it ;  and  if  the  Question  be  about  a 
prison  wherein  the  Querent  fears  he  shall  be  put,  it  signifies, 
he  shall  be  cast  into  the  same  together  with  disgrace  and 
prejudice ;  and  if  the  Question  concerns  one  already  in 
prison,  it  signifies  a  tedious  confinement  and  more  affliction 
than  he  believes. 

25.  The  Twenty  Fifth  Consideration  is.  Whether  the 
Planet  that  is  Significator  be  Retrograde,  or  Stationary  to 
Retrogradation :  for  then  it  signifies  mischief  and  damage, 
discord,  contradiction,  and  going  backward  with  damage ; 
yet  being  Stationary,  is  not  so  bad,  as  being  Retrograde. 
For  the-  last  notes  the  mischief  to  be,  as  it  were,  present 
and  in  being.  But  being  Stationary  notes  that  'tis  past  and 
over. 

26.  The  Twenty  Sixth  Consideration  is.  Whether  the 
Significator  be  in  his  Second  Station,  that  is  towards 
Direction :  for  that  signifies  also  hindrance  and  evil,  which 
already  hath  been  and  is  past;  yet  some  say  that  this 
Second  Station  is  as  good  as  direction :  but  this  is  only  a 
way  of  speaking,  as  when  one  hath  been  sick  and  begins  to 
grow  well,  we  say  he  is  recovered  and  sound,  which  is  not 
simply  true,  but  somewhat  near  it ;  for  as  the  First  Station  is 
not  so  bad  as  Retrogradation,  so  the  Second  Station  is  not 
so  good  as  direction. 

27.  The  Twenty  Seventh  Consideration  is,  Whether  the 
Infortunes  are  the  Significators  of  anything :  for  if  they 
signify  ill,  the  evil  will  be  much  augmented,  and  if  good  it 
will  be  much  diminished,  abated,  imperfect,  and  with 
difficulty ;  so  that  the  party  will  scarce  think  his  business 
done,  unless  by  chance  they  be  in  a  very  good  condition 
and  excellently  disposed. 

28.  The  28th  Consideration  is,  Whether  the  Significator 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  ID 

be  slow  of  Course,  for  then  it  delays  the  effect ;  and  if  it  be 
in  the  beginning  of  anything,  retards  it,  so  that  it  will 
scarce  ever  be  finished:  besides,  things  proceed  slowly, 
where  Significators  are  pointed  in  Sagittary,  Capricorn, 
Aquary  or  Pisces :  or  who  are  the  Lords  of  them,  whether 
they  be  slow  of  course  ;  in  Aries  or  Scorpio  they  are  not 
quite  so  dilatory.  In  Leo  they  hasten  business ;  more  in 
Taurus  or  Libra ;  but  most  of  all  in  Gemini  or  Yirgo. 

29.  The  29th  Consideration  is,  Whether  the  Moon  be 
joined  to  any  planet  by  body  or  aspect  exactly  to  a 
minute  :  for  that  signifies  the  present  state  of  things ;  and 
from  that  minute  observe  what  planet  she  joins  next,  for  he 
shall  be  Significator  of  all  that  shall  happen  of  that  thing ; 
as  the  planet  she  was  last  before  with,  was  of  what  has 
already  passed  as  aforesaid. 

30.  The  30th  Consideration  is.  To  observe  when  a  planet 
that  is  Significator,,  or  the  Moon,  shall  have  past  the 
29th  degree  of  the  Sign  wherein  it  is,  and  touches  the  SOtl:), 
and  especially  if  it  have  passed  one  minute  of  that  degree  ; 
for  then  it  shall  have  no  strength  in  that  Sign,  but  in  tlie 
next;  so  that  if  in  the  first  it  signified  any  evil,  it  shall  hurt 
the  person  or  thing  threatened  no  more  than  the  fall  of  a 
house  shall  one  that  is  just  got  out  of  it ;  or  being  with  one 
foot  upon  the  threshold,  has  one  behind  him  that  throws  him 
out ;  and  then  the  building  falls.  And  if  it  signified  any 
good,  it  shall  profit  no  more  than  he  that  hath  spread  a  net 
for  birds,  and  just  touches  the  feathers  of  their  tails,  but 
never  catches  their  bodies ;  and  therefore  "  Zael "  says,  If  a 
planet  or  the  Moon  be  in  the  29th  degree  of  any  Sign,  its 
virtue  is  yet  in  that  Sign  wherein  he  is  ;  because  he  has  nob 
yet  wholly  past  the  29th  degree,"  etc. 

31.  The  31st  Consideration  is,  To  look  when  one  planet 
applies  to  the  Conjunction  of  another,  if  he  be  near  the  end 
of  the  same  Sign  wherein  he  is  himself,  or  that  other  to 
whom  he  applies ;  so  that  he  will  pass  out  of  that  Sign 

2—2 


20 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


before  the  Conjunction  is  perfected ;  and  to  see  if  he  be 
joined  with  him  in  the  following  Sign  to  which  he  is 
changed,  because  then  the  cause  is  perfected  ;  if  that  planet 
confers  anything  on  him  in  that  Sign  wherein  he  is  so  joined 
to  him;  that  is,  if  any  reception  happen,  unless  the  said 
planet,  or  he  to  whom  he  applies,  be  first  joined  to  another ; 
for  then,  the  business  comes  to  nothing,  and  will  not  be 
perfected,  though  he  be  joined  again  to  the  first  after  he  is 
separated  from  him  to  whom  he  would  have  joined  when 
he  changed  from  the  said  Sign ;  since  the  other  interposed 
before  the  first  Conjunction  is  accomplished.  Nor  must  it 
be  forgotten  that  a  corporal  Conjunction  forbids  an  Aspect 
and  cuts  it  off,  but  an  Aspect  cannot  do  so  by  a  Conjunc- 
tion. 

32.  The  32nd  Consideration  is.  If  an  Infortune  be  the 
Significator^  what  his  condition  is ;  for  if  it  be  good,  there 
will  good  come  of  the  thing :  if  bad,  rather  evil ;  as 
^'  Sarviator  "  says  in  "  Pentadera,"  "  An  ill-planet  strong  in 
his  own  Home  or  Exaltation,  not  joined  with  any  other 
Infortune  to  impede  or  weaken  him,  is  better  than  a 
Fortune  Ketrograde  afiiicted." 

33.  The  33rd  Consideration  is,  To  see  whether  either  of 
the  Infortunes  be  the  Significator  of  anything,  and  be  joined 
to  another  Infortune  impeding  him,  or  has  joined  to  him  the 
Lord  of  the  Ascendant  or  the  Moon,  by  a  Square  or  Opposi- 
tion ;  for  then  this  Infortune  will  perfect  the  business,  but 
the  business  will  not  be  good,  or  rather  it  will  be  destroyed 
after  it  seems  perfected.  But  if  the  Infortune  that  Impedes 
be  the  lighter  of  the  two,  so  that  he  apply  to  a  Conjunction, 
Vv'ith  the  Significator,  it  will  hinder  less  than  if  the  Signi- 
ficator apply  to  the  other. 

34.  The  34th  Consideration  is.  To  mind  in  Questions  or 
Nativities,  whether  the  Significator  of  the  business  be  an 
Infortune  and  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  and  in  the  Ascendant ; 
direct,  not  vitiated,  and  in  good  condition ;  for  then  he 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  21 

would  both  affect  the  same  and  bring  it  to  a  good  conclu- 
sion ;  nay,  although  he  be  not  Significator  nor  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant,  but  only  be  in  the  Ascendant,  and  that  the  same 
be  his  Exaltation;  he  lays  aside  all  his  malice,and  is  restrained 
from  mischief ;  but  if  he  be  v/eak  and  afflicted,  his  malice  and 
contrariety  is  increased  so  as  to  destroy  the  business  wholly. 

35.  The  35th  Consideration  is,  To  look  whether  an  Infortune 
be  in  Signs  like  him,  or  of  his  own  nature,  for  that  abates  his 
ill  effects ;  like  a  cross  fellow  when  he  is  pleased  and  has 
what  he  will,  as  Saturn  in  Capricorn,  Aquary,  or  Libra,  or  in 
a  cold  Sign,  especially  if  he  have  any  Dignities  there :  and 
so  Mars  in  Aries,  Scorpio,  Capricorn,  or  a  hot  Sign,  etc.  But 
if  Saturn  be  in  a  hot  Sign,  or  Mars  in  a  cold  Sign,  out  of 
their  dignities,  it  will  be  bad,  and  the  business  be  no  more 
completed,  than  oil  will  mix  with  water  ;  but  if  strong  and 
well  disposed,  they  will  mix  in  good,  like  water  and  wine, 
or  milk  with  honey. 

36.  The  36th  Consideration  is,  To  observe  when  the 
Infortunes  are  the  obstructors  of  a  business,  whether  the 
Fortunes  behold  them  with  a  Trine  or  Sextile  Aspect ;  for 
then  their  ill-nature  will  be  allayed  and  mitigated ;  but 
much  more  if  these  receive  them. 

37.  The  37th  Consideration  is.  To  look  if  the  Fortunes  are 
the  Significators  ? — Whether  the  Infortunes  behold  them 
with  Opposition  or  Square ;  for  that  will  much  lessen 
their  kind  effects,  and  diminish  the  good  they  otherwise 
promised. 

38.  The  38th  Consideration  is.  To  consider  if  the  Fortunes 
are  Significators,  whether  they  are  Cadent  from  Angles  or 
from  the  Ascendant,  so  as  not  to  behold  the  same,  and  be 
Retrograde ;  for  under  these  Impediments  they  will  be 
almost  as  bad  as  the  Infortunes  themselves,  unless  they  be 
in  reception. 

39.  The  39th  is,  To  consider  if  the  Significator  be  in 
Reception ;  for  if  it  be  a  Fortune,  its  signification  will 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


thereby  be  much  bettered,  and  its  impediment  and  mischief 
much  lessened  if  it  be  an  Infortune. 

40.  The  40th  is,  To  consider  if  an  Infortune,  whether  he 
be  Significator  or  not,  be  Peregrine  ;  that  is,  not  in  any  of 
his  Dignities,  for  then  his  malice  is  increased;  but  when  in 
his  Dignities  it  somewhat  abates  it ;  that  is  in  his  House, 
Exaltation,  or  Terms;  but  in  his  Triplicity  or  Face  very 
little,  and  in  Hayz  least  of  all. 

41.  The  41st  is,  If  an  Infortune,  being  Significator,  be 
in  his  own  House  or  Exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Terms  or 
Triplicity,  or  in  Angles  or  Succedent  Houses;  for  by  all 
these  means  he  is  fortified,  and  shall  be  counted  strong  as  a 
Fortune. 

42.  The  42nd  is,  If  a  Fortune  be  Significator,  or  give 
virtue  or  assistance  to  any  of  the  Planets,  and  be  in  a 
House  where  he  has  none  of  the  Lordly  Dignities,  then  his 
good  signification  will  be  lessened  and  abated ;  and  so  on 
the  contrary. 

43.  The  43rd  is.  If  the  Fortunes  and  Infortunes  be 
together  ill  posited,  that  is,  in  some  of  the  said  Impedi- 
ments, as  Houses  where  they  have  no  Dignities,  Combust, 
or  the  like  ;  then  whatever  they  signify  'tis  but  weakly  ; 
according  to  that  Aphorism  of  the  Philosopher,  "  A  Planet 
Retrograde  and  Combust,  has  no  strength  in  signification. 
The  Fortunes  when  Combust  and  under  the  sun's  beams^ 
signify  none  or  very  little  good ;  and  the  Infortunes  in  like 
case  have  little  or  no  virtue  to  signify  ill."* 

44.  The  44th  is.  To  consider  if  the  Significator, — Fortune 
or  Infortune,  be  in  his  own  House,  Exaltation,  Triplicity, 
Terms  or  Face  (but  the  latter  being  not  of  that  virtue  with 
the  rest,  'tis  necessary  it  should  be  assisted  with  another 
Dignity,  which  is  Hayz  or  Light),  for  in  such  case  the 
Infortune  loses  his  sting  ;  and  being  rein'd  in  like  a  wild 
horse  from  doing  mischief,  his  malice  is  converted  into  good, 

An  Infortune  should  be  regarded  as  having  very  evil  signification 
under  the  circumstances. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


23 


and  though  this  seems  strange,  yet  the  ancients  affirm  and  I 
myself  have  often  found  it  true  by  experience. 

45.  The  45th  is,  To  consider  if  Infortunes  are  in  Angles 
of  the  Ascendant,  that  is,  in  such  signs  as  are  in  Square  or 
Opposition  to  the  Ascendant,  when  they  afflict  any  Planet 
by  Square  or  Opposition;  for  then  they  assist  so  much  the 
worse,  and  do  more  mischief,  especially  if  they  be  in  a 
stronger  place  than  such  afflicted  Planet ;  but  if  they  cast 
only  a  Trine  or  a  Sextile,  it  is  lessened  and  the  Impediment 
mitigated. 

46.  The  46th  is,  To  see  whether  the  Significator  be  a 
Fortune  or  an  Infortune,  the  first  naturally  signifies  good 
and  prosperity,  the  last  naturally  evil  by  its  malignity; 
therefore  consider  the  Planets'  places  from  the  Ascendant 
where  they  are;  for  if  a  Planet  be  in  his  Light,  or  his 
Hayz  in  any  of  his  Dignities,  or  in  a  good  place  from  the 
Ascendant,  it  signifies  good ;  and  if  it  be  a  good  Planet  the 
better. 

47.  The  47th  is,  To  consider  whether  the  Significator  be 
in  his  Light  or  no,  that  is  a  Diurnal  Planet  in  the  day, 
above  the  earth,  and  in  the  night  under  the  earth ;  and  a 
Nocturnal  Planet  in  the  night  above  the  earth,  and  in  the 
day  under  it :  for  this  renders  such  Planet  more  strong. 
But  if  a  Nocturnal  Planet  be  Significator  of  anything  in  the 
day  above  the  earth,  or  a  Diurnal  Planet  in  the  night,  the 
same  is  thereby  weakened  and  under  a  kind  of  impediment, 
that  he  can  scarce  accomplish  what  he  signifies. 

48.  The  48th  is.  To  consider,  when  an  Infortune  is  Signi- 
ficator and  his  ill  effects  are  mitigated,  whether  Jupiter 
behold  him,  or  is  joined  corporally  to  him  ?  For  that  will 
wholly  destroy  his  malignity  and  turn  his  nature  into  good, 
how  bad  soever  he  be ;  so  that  if  Saturn  in  that  place  of 
himself  would  not  bestow  some  good  or  perform  what  he 
seems  to  promise,  Jupiter  will  make  him  do  it,  provided  he 
be  not  afflicted  himself,  as  in  his  fall,  Combust  or  Retrograde 


24 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


(yet  even  then  he  helps,  but  not  so  powerfully).  On  the 
other  side  Venus  takes  off  the  fury  of  Mars,  by  reason  of 
that  endearing  intimacy  which  is  between  them,  unless  the 
thing  be  very  difficult,  as  wars  and  bloodshed,  etc.  But  she 
cannot  so  well  divert  the  mischief  of  Saturn  without  the 
help  of  Jupiter  (and  then  she  can  do  it  as  well  as  at  other 
times  that  of  Mars).  The  reason  is,  there  is  no  such 
sympathy  between  Saturn  and  she,  in  any  respect;  for  he 
is  slow,  she  swift ;  he  heavy,  she  light ;  he  delights  in 
melancholy,  she  in  mirth. 

49.  The  49th  is  to  consider,  Whether  one  of  the  Infortunes 
being  Significator,  be  joined  to  another,  for  if  he  signified  a 
good  of  himself,  this  will  destroy  or  frustrate  it ;  but  if  any 
evil,  it  will  augment  and  double  it,  or  change  it  into  some 
worse  mischief  of  another  kind  ;  as  when  the  pain  near  the 
navel  turns  into  a  dry  Dropsy;  but  if  joined  to  a  Fortune 
with  a  Reception  on  either  side,  the  evil  will  be  converted 
into  good ;  but  without  a  Reception  it  will  only  be  allayed 
and  abated,  according  to  the  strength  of  such  Fortune. 

50.  The  50th  is.  To  observe  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant 
and  the  Moon,  whether  they  or  either  of  them  are  afflicted 
by  either  of  the  Infortunes,  by  Conjunction,  Opposition,  or 
Square,  the  business  will  be  spoiled  without  the  aspect  of 
a  Fortune,  but  if  a  Fortune,  that  is,  Jupiter,  Venus,  the  Sun 
or  Moon  shall  behold  them,  it  slackens  and  dissolves  the 
rigours  of  such  Infortune,  and  the  party  signified  shall  be 
freed  from  the  danger  impending,  although  the  aspect  be  a 
Square,  provided  it  be  with  Reception ;  but  if  a  Fortune 
without  Reception,  by  a  Square  or  Opposition,  or  an  Infortune 
with  a  Trine  or  Sextile  without  Reception,  shall  behold  the 
said  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  'tis  possible  the  party  may  be 
delivered  from  the  present  danger ;  but  it  will  be  turned 
into  another  as  great :  so  that  it  will  not  profit  him. 

51.  The  51st  is,  To  see  whether  the  Significator  be  cadent 
from  an  Angle  or  from  the  Ascendant,  and  in  none  of  his 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


25 


Dignities,  nor  in  his  Joy  :  for  then  he  signifies  nothing  but 
doubts  and  mischiefs,  and  there  are  no  hopes  of  good  or  profit 
from  a  planet  so  disposed. 

52.  The  52nd  is,  When  the  three  Inferiors,  Venus,  Mer- 
cury, and  Luna,  come  from  under  the  rays  of  the  Sun,  and 
appear  in  the  evening  after  his  setting,  for  before  (viz.,  till  they 
are  got  from  him  12  degrees)  they,  or  any  other  planet,  are 
weak,  so  that  a  Fortune  can  advantage  little, and  an  Infortune 
prejudice  as  much.  Now  if  the  Fortune  come  forth  slow  in 
motion,  as  with  labour,  then  will  not  the  good  expected  be 
obtained  without  much  pains  and  trouble ;  and  if  it  be  an 
Infortune,  his  signification  will  appear  slowly.  But  in  tlie 
Superiors,  as  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  these  things  happen 
when  they  come  from  under  the  Sun  beams,  that  they  rise 
in  the  morning  before  the  Sun,  and  shine  before  his  rising. 

53.  The  53rd  Consideration  is,  Whether  the  significator 
be  under  the  Sun  beams,  for  then  he  will  be  of  small 
eflacacy  in  anything  as  aforesaid  ;  yet  the  Malevolents  will  be 
something  more  strong  in  evil  than  the  Benevolents  in  good. 

Note  by  Lilly. — "  Now  a  planet  is  properly  said  to  be 
under  the  Sun  beams,  when  there  are  only  12  degrees  or^ 
les_s,  or  above,  or  16  minutes'  distance  between  it  and  the 
Sun  ;  for  when  there  is  only  16  minutes'  distance,  it  is  said 
to  be  strong,  being  in  Cazimi,  or  the  heart  of  the  Sun  ;^  but  | 
when  there  are  more  than  12°  and  less  than  15°,  it  is  said 
to  be  going  from  under  the  Sun's  beams." 

54.  The  54th  is,  To  consider  whether  a  superior  planet  be 
removed  12  degrees  from  the  Sun,  going  to  his  morning 
rising,  or  an  Inferior  is  so  much,  and  direct^  going  to  his 
evening  rising,  for  then  he  is  said  to  be  fortified ;  but  when 
he  is  got  15  degrees,  so  that  he  appears,  he  is  more  fortified 
in  everything ;  like  one  coming  out  of  a  battle  rejoicing 

*  This  fortitude  is  very  doubtful  ;  a  planet  so  situated  should 
be  regarded  as  in  the  worst  state  of  Combustion. 


26 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


having  destroyed  and  routed  all  his  enemies.  But  when 
the  Sun  follows  the  three  Superiors,  and  there  shall  be 
between  them  and  him  less  than  15  degrees,  their  weakness 
is  said  to  be  increased,  until  there  shall  be  only  7  degrees 
between  them  and  afterwards,  until  they  shall  be  in  the 
heart  of  the  Sun,  they  are  said  to  be  in  extreme  debility ; 
but  the  debility  of  the  Inferiors  is  contrary  to  them,  for  it  is 
said  to  be  increased  when  they  follow  the  Sun,  and  that 
there  is  between  them  and  the  Sun  from  15  degrees  to  7°, 
and  from  7"  till  they  are  in  the  heart  of  the  Sun,  they  are 
said  to  be  in  their  greatest  debility. 

55.  The  55th  is,  To  consider  w^hether  the  significator  be 
Peregrine,  for  then  the  person  whom  he  signifies,  either  in  a 
Nativity  or  Question,  etc.,  will  be  subtle,  crafty,  malicious, 
one  that'  shall  know  how  to  act  both  good  and  evil,  but 
more  inclinable  to  the  latter. 

56.  The  56th  is,  To  consider  if  the  significator  of  any- 
thing shall  commit  his  disposition  or  virtue  to  any  other 
planet  ?  whether  it  be  to  one  that  is  Oriental  or  Occidental  ? 
for  if  he  be  Oriental  and  one  of  the  Inferiors  and  direct,  or 
if  he  be  Occidental  and  one  of  the  Superiors,  and  that  there 
be  not  above  20  minutes  between  him  and  the  Sun,  he  will 
be  weak,  says  Sarcinator,"  and  not  perform  what  he  shows, 
but  hinders  many  things ;  under  that  impediment  like  a 
sick  man  whose  disease  has  prevailed  so  far,  that  he  is 
forced  to  lie  by  it,  and  cannot  help  himself ;  or  a  falling 
house  which  none  can  preserve  from  ruin;  and  so  much 
further  as  such  planet  shall  be  from  the  Sun,  so  much  less 
shall  he  be  afflicted.  And  if  it  be  Oriental,  and  one  of  the 
Superiors,  or  Occidental,  and  one  of  the  Inferiors,  and  not 
Retrograde,  he  shall  be  strong  and  fit  to  perfect  what  he 
promises ;  as  one  that  hath  been  ill,  but  is  more  perfectl}^ 
recovered,  or  a  building  which  fell  and  is  repaired,  and  so  of 
all  other  planets  so  disposed. 

57.  The  57th  is,  To  consider  whether  the  significator  be  in 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  27 

the  Eighth  from  the  Ascendant  ?  for  if  he  be  there,  and  a 
Fortune,  though  he  do  not  harm,  he  will  do  no  good ;  and  if 
he  be  an  Infortune  he  will  do  greater  mischief  than  in  any- 
other  place  of  the  Figure  ;  and  if  the  Question  be  of  going 
to  War,  advise  not  the  Querent  to  go  there,  although  it  be 
a  Fortune ;  for  always  some  evil  is  to  be  suspected,  that  is 
death,  or  at  least  captivity,  for  it  is  a  place  of  darkness  and 
death;  but  if  it  be  an  Infortune,  judge  death,  unless  he 
separate  then  from  the  Lord  of  the  Eighth  :  for  then  it  may 
be  only  a  wound,  or  bruise,  or  a  fall,  wherein  he  was  in 
danger  of  death,  although  he  may  escape ;  and  if  it  be  a 
journey,  especially  a  long  one,  he  will  be  taken  prisoner,  or 
in  great  dread  of  it  ;  understand  still  if  he  separate  from 
the  Lord  of  the  Eighth ;  and  also  remember  that  an  In- 
fortune so  disposed  always  does  more  mischief  than  a 
Fortune. 

58.  The  58th  is  to  consider,  "Whether  the  significator  be 
fixed  in  that  Sign  where  he  is  found  ?  Now  "  Zael "  saith  : 
*'  That  a  Planet  is  not  said  to  be  fixed  in  a  Sign  till  he  hath 
passed  5  degrees  thereof."  But  I  am  of  opinion  that  when 
he  hath  passed  one  whole  degree  of  a  Sign  he  is  firmly 
therein,  but  he  said  it  for  more  certainty.  So  likewise  he 
says :  "  That  a  Planet  is  not  said  to  be  cadent  from  the 
Ascendant,  unless  he  be  removed  from  thence  5  degrees; 
as,  for  example,  the  Ascendant  in  9  degrees  of  Aries,  and  a 
Planet  was  in  the  fifth  degree  thereof,  *  Ptolomy,'  and 
many  other  sages  affirm,  That  Planet  to  be  in  an  angle, 
with  whom  I  agree ;  yet  some  would  have  it,  that  a  Planet 
should  be  said  to  be  in  an  angle,  when  he  is  in  the  very 
degree  of  the  Ascendant,  or  one  degree  before  it  or  two 
after  it ;  but  they  meant  in  Revolutions,  and  that  they 
might  be  so  certain  as  not  to  be  in  the  least  deceived.  But 
I  have  experienced  that  a  Planet  is  in  an  Angle  to  the 
space  of  5  degrees  beyond  the  cusp ;  for  as  once  I  sought 
the  Bevolution  of  a  year,  I  found  Mars  in  the  5th  degree 


28 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


beyond  the  cusp  of  the  Angle  of  the  earth  in  Capricorn^ 
South  Latitude,  which  signified  the  killing  of  the  Roman 
Emperor ;  and  acquainted  him  with  it,  for  his  court  was  at 
*  Gross ietti '  and  I  at  '  Forlirii '  ;  and  it  was  found  that 
'  Pandulfus  de  Farsenella'  and  'Theobaldus  Franciscus/ 
and  divers  others  of  the  secretaries  had  conspired  to  slay 
him,  and  none  of  his  ov/n  Astrologers  observed  it,  because 
they  did  not  believe  that  Mars  was  in  an  Angle,  for  he  was 

4  degrees  beyond  the  cusp  and  58  minutes  in  their  opinion  ; 
however,  after  a  Planet  shall  be  removed  from  the  cusp  or 
line  of  any  angle  full  5  degrees  or  more,  he  is  to  be 
counted  cadent  from  that  angle." 

59.  The  59th  is  to  consider,  whether  the  significator  be 
behind  the  cusp  of  an  Angle  15  degrees  and  no  more ;  for  he 
shall  be  said  to  be  in  an  Angle  as  well  as  he  that  is  exactly 
there,  as  '^Zael  "  affirms ;  whence  he  said  before  that  it  was 
not  in  an  Angle,  nor  had  any  strength  there  beyond  the 
15th  degree  after  the  cusp  of  the  Angle:  For  example. 
The  Ascendant  is  4  degrees  of  Taurus,  and  the  end  thereof 
was  behind  the  Angle,  whatever  planet  is  posited  from  the 
4th  to  the  19th  degree  thereof  is  in  the  angle,  but  what  is 
beyond  that  is  not ;  but  Ptolomy  seems  to  intimate,  though 
he  says  not  expressly,     that  every  planet  who  shall  bo 

5  degrees  before,  or  25°  after  the  cusp,  is  in  the  Angle." 
Now  "  Zael "  would  clear  the  doubt,  lest  that  great  distance 
of  the  planet  from  the  Angle  should  hinder  the  business. 

Note  hy  Lilly. — The  same  Ptolomy  (from  whom  I  cannot 
differ)  seems  to  assert,  That  no  part  of  any  House  remains 
void  of  virtue ;  and  myself  am  of  opinion,  I  think  not  idly, 
that  every  planet  that  is  in  any  House  shall  be  said  to  be  in 
that  House  where  he  is  found,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
House  even  to  the  end  thereof ;  and  therefore  I  say  in  the 
House,  not  in  the  Sign,  because  sometimes  the  same  House 
comprehends  more  than  one  Sign  and  sometimes  less ;  for  it 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


29 


seems  ridiculous  tliat  any  part  of  any  House  should  con- 
tinue idle,  and  be  left  void  of  virtue. 

GO.  The  60th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  significator  be 
in  a  Sign  fixed,  common,  or  moveable ;  because  in  a  fixed 
Sign  he  signifies  stability  and  countenance  of  the  thing 
begun,  or  to  be  undertaken,  or  enquired  of.  In  a  common 
Sign,  a  change  with  a  return  or  repeating  of  it,  that  the 
same  will  once  be  broken  off,  and  afterwards  begun  again, 
or  something  added,  or  other  alteration  happen  ;  for  which 
reason  in  things  that  require  alteration,  as  buying,  selling, 
or  the  like,  we  should  put  the  Significator  and  Moon,  or  one 
of  them,  into  a  common  sign  ;  but  in  a  moveable  Sign  it 
signifies  a  sudden  change,  a  quick  despatch  or  end  whether 
good  or  evil.  And  therefore  in  matters  where  we  desire 
a  sudden  conclusion,  we  ought  to  put  the  significator  in 
moveable  Signs ;  but  in  things  that  we  desire  should  be 
fixed  and  endure,  we  ought  to  place  them  in  fixed  Signs, 
where  we  would  have  a  mean,  let  them  be  in  common  Signs^ 
understand  the  same  always  of  the  nature  of  the  Moon,  if  at 
any  time  thou  canst  observe  it. 

Gl.  The  61st  is  to  behold.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  or  Moon,  be  with  the  Dragon's  Head  or  Tail ;  for 
that  is  an  impediment  in  all  affairs,  and  the  hindrance  or 
mischief  will  proceed  from  a  cause  signified  by  that  House 
in  which  such  Conjunction  happens.  But  no  Conjunction  of 
the  Dragon's  Head  or  Tail  hurts,  unless  it  be  corporal,  for 
they  have  no  Aspect  or  Opposition.  And  it  is  worse  when 
the  Significator  or  Moon  goes  towards  them,  than  when 
they  go  from  them ;  for  in  the  first  case  is  signified  the 
mischief  in  its  full  height,  like  a  man  in  a  ship  that  is  split 
in  the  sea,  when  there  is  no  hope.  But  in  the  last,  'tis  like 
a  ship  that  is  only  in  danger,  but  has  hopes  and  probabi- 
lities of  escaping.  And  note  that  when  the  Significator  or 
Moon  goes  to  the  Dragon's  Head,  its  malice  is  augmented. 


so 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


for  its  nature  is  to  increase,  and  when  they  go  to  the  Tail, 
the  mischief  is  not  absolutely  at  the  worst,  as  'tis  when 
they  go  from  it,  that  is,  within  one  degree ;  for  from  one 
degree  forwards  'tis  not  so  great  as  in  that  degree,  although 
much ;  and  from  1°  to  3°  less,  and  from  8°  to  5°  yet  less, 
and  from  5°  to  7°  very  small ;  from  7°  to  9"  smaller,  and 
from  thence  to  12''  little  or  nothing  at  all. 

62.  The  62nd  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Moon  be  void 
of  course  1  for  that  signifies  that  the  thing  enquired  after 
shall  scarce  ever  come  to  a  good  end,  or  not  without  much 
labour,  sorrow,  and  trouble,  unless  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant 
or  significator  of  the  thing,  shall  be  in  very  good  condition, 
and  then  it  may  be  hindered,  but  not  wholly  frustrated  ; 
yet  'tis  a  good  time  then  for  drinking,  bathing,  feasting, 
etc.,  and  to  use  ointments  for  taking  away  of  hair,  especially 
if  she  be  in  Scorpio. 

63.  The  63rd  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Moon  be  far 
from  the  Conjunction  of  the  Infortunes,  so  as  not  to  cast 
her  beams  on  theirs,  for  then  the  event  will  be  good,  but 
rather  if  she  touch  with  her  beams  those  of  the  Fortunes. 
And  yet  better,  if  besides  this  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  or 
of  the  business,  be  in  good  condition ;  for  if  they  be  not 
well  disposed,  it  may  impair  the  good  promised,  but  not 
wholly  prevent  it. 

64.  The  64th  is  to  consider.  Whether  the  Moon  be  in 
Cancer,  Taurus,  Sagittarius,  or  Pisces  ;  for  it  signifies  good  in 
the  business,  although  she  be  joined  to  the  Infortunes  and 
not  to  the  Fortunes ;  nor  does  she,  being  void  of  course, 
prejudice  so  much  in  those  places  as  elsewhere,  provided 
she  be  not  Combust,  for  then  they  will  advantage  her  little 
or  nothing, 

65.  The  65th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Lord  of  the 
Seventh  is  afflicted  or  not  ?  for  that  will  be  an  impediment 
to  the  business.  And  you  ought  to  defer  judgment  if  you 
can,  and  warily  search  always  whence  such  impediment 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  31 

shall  arise,  as  well  by  the  Conj unction  of  the  Lord  of  the 
Seventh  with  the  Planets,  as  by  their  separation,  and  also  of 
the  Moon ;  so  may'st  thou  find  whence  it  will  proceed,  and 
afterwards  give  judgment  with  more  safety. 

66.  The  66th  is  to  consider.  When  the  Infortunes  threaten 
mischief,  whether  the  place  on  which  their  threats  fall,  be 
the  Dignity  of  any  of  the  Fortunes  ?  and  whether  such 
Fortune  behold  the  same  place  by  Trine  or  Sextile  ?  for 
then  it  will  take  away  the  mischief  and  annul  it  wholly. 
If  by  a  Square,  it  will  only  lessen  it ;  if  by  an  Opposition, 
take  away  some  part  of  it;  but  if  it  cast  no  aspect  at 
all,  the  mischief  will  happen  ;  but  it  will  proceed  from 
honest,  just  persons,  and  it  may  be  the  Querent  suffers 
rightfully,  being  cast  in  a  just  cause  before  a  Judge,  or  the 
like.  But  if  the  aforesaid  place  be  the  Dignity  of  an  In- 
fortune,  the  prejudice  will  come  from  unjust  men,  false 
witnesses,  a  corrupt  Judge,  or  some  sentence  unjustly  given 
through  a  mistake,  etc. 

67.  The  67th  is  to  consider,  Whether  there  be  any  Eclipse 
near,  which  is  less  than  12  degrees  from  the  significator  ? 
for  the  same  will  bring  damage  and  mischief  to  the  Querent 
or  business,  unless  there  be  there  a  Fortune  which  hath 
Dignities  in  the  same  place,  for  then  the  same  is  abated  ; 
but  if  there  be  no  such,  thou  oughtest  to  look  what  Planet 
beholds  the  said  place  of  the  Eclipse  and  how.  For  if  the 
Fortunes  behold  it,  they  do  but  augment  the  evil ;  and  if 
they  are  Infortunes,  they  lessen  and  abate  it,  which  seems 
a  kind  of  riddle  or  wonder  in  Art. 

68.  The  68th  is  to  consider,  in  questions  relating  to  sick 
people,  or  Decumbitures,  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  Seventh, 
and  Seventh  House  itself,  be  free  from  Impediments  ?  for 
if  they  be,  the  sick  may  safely  trust  himself  to  the  care  of 
the  Physicians,  for  medicines  will  do  very  well.  But  if  the 
Seventh  House  and  its  Lord  shall  be  Afiiicted,  Ptolomy  saith 
"The  Physician  must  be  changed,  for  neither  his  physic 


32 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


nor  care  will  do  any  good;  for  the  seventh  signifies  the 
medicine,  as  "  Zael "  saith ;  or  at  least  the  disease  grows 
chronical  and  lasting.  The  like  is  to  be  expected  if  the 
same  positions  happen  at  the  beginning  of  any  cure. 

69.  The  69th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  significators  of 
the  Ascendant,  and  of  the  House  signifying  the  thing 
enquired,  be  of  equal  strength  and  debility  ?  for  then  thou 
canst  not  safely  give  judgment:  but  in  such  case  thou 
must  mind  the  Lord  of  the  Conjunction  or  Prevention  (as 
the  thing  is  either  conjunctional  or  preventional)  which  was 
last  before,  and  by  that  judge.  But  if  the  Lord  of  the 
Conjunction  or  Prevention,  and  of  the  thing,  be  still  equal, 
thou  must  then  turn  to  the  Moon,  and  see  to  whom  she 
first  applies,  and  thence  deduce  judgment.  If  she  join 
not  to  any  in  or  from  the  Sign  in  which  she  is,  take  that 
with  whom  she  joins  first  in  the  next  Sign,  and  this  is  very 
considerably  useful. 

70.  The  70lh  Consideration  is.  To  mind  another  secret; 
not  well  searched  into  by  Astrologers,  but  often  times  doing 
them  much  prejudice ;  that  is,  see  in  all  Questions,  etc., 
whether  the  Lord  of  the  New  or  Full  Moon,  preventional 
last  before,  be  in  any  of  the  Angles  of  the  thing  enquired 
after ;  if  it  be,  it  denotes  that  the  business  will  be  accom- 
plished, unless  it  be  the  Querent's  own  fault  (or  that  God 
overrule  against  it),  though  perhaps  by  other  significations 
it  seemed  not  likely.  But  if  it  shall  not  happen  so,  but 
only  the  same  is  in  the  Ascendant ;  and  the  other  significa- 
tors, that  is,  The  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  of  the  thing 
enquired  of,  and  the  Moon,  or  any  of  them  assist,  the  thing 
will  be  done  with  ease.  If  it  be  in  Cadent  Houses,  it  will 
scarce  ever  be,  though  other  significators  seem  never  so 
favourable  ;  and  if  two  at  least  of  them  be  not  so,  take  it  for 
certain  it  will  never  be  done. 

71.  The  71st  is  to  consider.  Whether  the  Significator  falls 
between  the  Ascendant  and  the  Twelfth,  for  that  signifies 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


33 


continuance  or  length  of  time,  when  a  thing  will  be  done ; 
or  if  done  already,  how  long  it  will  continue  in  days  or 
hours.  If  between  the  twelfth  and  the  tenth,  it  notes  half 
weeks ;  between  the  tenth  and  seventh,  months  or  weeks  ; 
between  the  seventh  and  fourth,  years ;  and  between  the 
Fourth  and  the  Ascendant,  half  years."^ 

*  With  regard  to  the  measure  of  time,  the  late  Commander  Morri- 
son, K.N.,  writes,  "  The  most  difficult  thing  in  all  questions  is  to  judge 
of  time  with  accuracy.  I  should  advise  extreme  caution  in  giving 
any  judgment  on  this  head,  unless  where  it  is  the  chief  point  desired 
to  be  known.  In  this  case  and  if  the  figure  be  very  radical,  and  if 
the  planet  which  is  applying  to  the  other  be  taken,  the  following  rule 
will  hold  good  : 

Each  Degree  gives — 

In  Moveable  Signs  and  Angles  ....  Days. 
In  Common  Signs  and  Angles  ....  Weeks. 
In  Fixed  Signs  and  Angles      ....  Months. 

Succeedent  houses  give  weeks,  months  and  years,  as  the  sign  is  movedble, 
common  or  fixed ;  and  cadent  houses  give  77ionths  in  moveable  signs, 
yeai-s  in  common  signs,  and  an  indefinite  time  in  fixed  signs." 

Dr.  Simmonite,  whose  Astrological  works  are  well  known,  writes 
"  It  is  generally  very  difficult  to  judge  of  time  with  accuracy.  The 
hmitation  of  time  is  taken  either  by  house  and  sign,  or  by  aspect. 
To  ascertain  the  number  of  days,  weeks,  months,  or  years,  consider 
the  degrees  and  minutes  between  the  body  or  aspect  of  the  signifi- 
cators,  and  according  to  the  number  of  degrees  which  are  between 
their  aspect,  even  so  many  days,  weeks,  months,  or  years  will  it  be 
before  the  matter  enquired  after  is  accomplished  or  destroyed. 
Observe  in  what  house  or  sign  the  applying  significator  falls.  Suc- 
ceedent  houses  give  weeks,  months,  or  years,  as  the  sign  is  moveable, 
common  or  fixed,  and  cadent  houses  give  months  in  moveable  signs, 
years,  in  common,  and  unknown  in  fixed  signs.  Great  south  latitude 
prolongs  the  time  ;  great  north  latitude  often  cuts  it  shorter  :  if  the 
significators  have  no  latitude,  the  exact  time  is  made  simply  by  the 
aspects.  Degrees  and  minutes  of  latitude,  if  it  be  south,  should,  it  is 
said,  be  added  to  the  time,  but  if  north  subtracted  from  it ;  as  north 
latitude  shortens  the  time  of  an  event  and  south  latitude  lengthens 
it,  but  I  have  not  much  opinion  of  this.  Transits  show  the  progress 
of  the  matter  and  point  out  the  most  probable  time  in  which  the 

3 


34 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


72.  The  72nd  is  to  observe,  That  if  the  question  be  of  a 
journey,  and  the  Moon  afflicted,  it  is  not  safe  to  undertake 
it ;  but  if  it  cannot  be  put  off,  make  the  Planet  that  afflicts 
her,  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  at  the  time  of  the  Querent's 
setting  forth. 

73.  The  73rd  is  to  mind,  Whether  the  Question  signify 
good  or  evil  ?  If  good,  whether  the  Fortunes  beheld  the 
Significator  of  the  Question,  or  the  Moon  ?  for  then  the 
good  Fortune  thereof  will  be  increased  :  but  if  the  In  fortunes 
cast  in  their  beams,  as  much  or  more  diminished.  But  if  it 
originally  signify  evil,  and  the  Inf or  tunes  behold  the 
Significator  or  Moon,  as  aforesaid,  the  evil  threatened  will 
be  increased  and  become  much  worse. 

74.  The  74th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Significator  be 
in  his  first  station,  going  to  be  Eetrograde  ?  for  that  signifies 
crossness  and  disobedience,  and  that  the  matter,  though 
never  so  probable,,  will  not  be  accomplished.  If  any  work 
or  building  be  then  begun,  it  will  not  be  finished.  And  if 
such  Significator,  so  asserted,  be  then  under  the  earth,  such 
building  shall  not  be  raised  to  any  purpose  in  thirty  years, 
and  then  not  finished ;  and  if  it  be  raised  a  little  then,  it  will 
be  a  raising  thirty  years  more.  And  if  not  then  completed, 
it  will  not  be  completed  till  ninety  years  after  its  first ;  and 
if  not  then,  it  will  never  be  finished,  unless  the  property  be 
altered,  and  come  into  the  possession  of  strangers  from  its 
former  owners.  But  if  the  Significator  be  in  his  second 
station,  going  to  be  direct,  it  notes  that  the  affair  will 
be  done,  but  slowly,  intricately,  and  with  pains  and  trouble. 
And  if  any  edifice  be  then  begun,  it  will  be  finished, 
but  not  so  soon  as  was  at  first  believed,  provided  the 
Significator  be  not  under  the  earth  ;  for  then  he  that  begins 

matter  niay  be  terniinated  ;  and  that  is  the  time  to  judge  of.  The 
good  or  evil  days  are  those  on  which  the  transits  are  good  or  evil. 
Mixed  application  gives,  instead  of  years  say  months  ;  for  months 
weeks ;  and  for  weeks  say  days." 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  35 

it  shall  never  make  aa  end  of  it,  nor  raise  it  very  high  above 
the  earth. 

Note  hy  Lilly. — "And  note,  A  Planet  in  his  second  station 
signifies  an  aptness,  and  the  renewing  and  strength  of  every- 
tliing ;  but  in  his  first  station,  dissolution  and  destruction. 
Kemember  and  understand  these  things  well,  for  they  will 
often  come  in  practice." 

75.  The  75th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Moon  be 
afflicted  by  any  Planet  ?  for  then,  whatever  the  question  be, 
the  same  will  suffer  impediment.  But  if  the  Moon  be  in  a 
good  place  from  the  Ascendant,  so  as  to  behold  it  with 
a  Trine  or  Sextile,  or  if  the  Planet  that  afflicts  her  do  behold 
the  same,  either  of  these  Aspects  will  mitigate  the  mischief 
intended,  and  it  may  be,  wholly  take  it  away,  as  the  said 
afflicting  Planet  is  disposed ;  so  that  he  be  not  Cadent  from 
Angles,  nor  from  the  Ascendant,  nor  in  his  fall ;  that  is 
with  the  seventh  from  his  own  House.  Zael "  seems  to 
say  "  That  if  an  Infortune  afflicting  be  cadent  from  the 
Ascendant,  or  retrograde,  it  causeth  fear  in  the  Querent; 
but  I  always  fear  the  affliction  of  the  Moon  above  all  other 
Impediments,  and  scarce  Remember  that  I  ever  saw  a  good 
end  of  anything  where  she  was  afflicted  :  and  in  journeys,  if 
to  war,  was  apprehensive  of  the  Querent's  care  and  person  ; 
if  for  traffic,  of  straits,  quarrels,  sadness  in  his  travels,  and 
loss  of  money,  etc." 

76.  The  76th  is  to  consider,  From  what  Planet  the  Moon 
separates,  and  which  she  is  joined  to  ;  he  whom  she  separates 
from  signifies  what  hath  been,  the  other  what  is  to  come, 
as  we  have  said.  And  therefore,  if  she  separates  from 
an  Infortune,  and  applies  to  a  Fortune,  the  worst  is  past ; 
and  what  hitherto  has  been  had,  will  end  happily  to  the 
Querent's  content.  But  if  she  separates  from  a  Fortune, 
and  goes  to  an  Infortune,  understand  the  contrar}^ ;  the 
thing  was  good  in  its  beginning,  but  proves  naught  in  the 

3—2 


36 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


end.  If  from  a  Fortune  to  a  Fortune,  it  was  and  is  good, 
and  will  have  a  laudable  end.  If  from  an  Infortune  to  an 
Infortune,  it  will  be  an  ugly  conclusion.* 

77.  The  77th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  or  Moon  be  in  Opposition,  that  is,  whether  the 
Moon  be  in  Capricorn,  Mercury  in  Sagittarius  or  Pisces,  or 
Venus  in  Scorpio  or  Aries,  the  Sun  in  Aquarius,  Mars  in 
Taurus  or  Libra,  Jupiter  in  Gemini  or  Virgo,  Saturn  in 
Cancer  or  Leo ;  for  then  such  Lords  of  the  Question  abhor 
the  business  ;  nor  does  he  love  it  should  be  accomplished, 
but  is  rather  against  it. 

78.  The  78th  is  to  consider,  The  House  that  signifies  the 
thing  whereof  the  Question  is  asked.  For  the  First  signifies 
the  Person,  the  Second,  substance,  the  Third,  brethren,  etc., 
as  we  have  before  taught,  and  as  it  shall  appear,  so  judge; 
having  duly  pondered  all  circumstances. 

79.  The  79th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Significator,  or 
Moon,  be  joined  to  good  or  ill  planets,  by  Conjunction  or  by 
Aspect,  which  is  diligently  to  be  heeded  and  distinguished ; 
for  a  corporal  conjunction  with  the  sun  is  the  greatest 
misfortune  can  befall  a  Planet. 

80.  The  80th  is  to  consider.  How  the  Significator  is 
posited  in  respect  of  his  own  House,  whether  in  the  second, 
third,  or  fourth,  etc.,  sign^  from  it,  according  to  the  Signifi- 

This  Consideration  is  on  the  doctrine  of  "Translation."  Transla- 
tion of  the  light  and  nature  of  a  planet  is  when  a  planet  separates  from 
one  that  is  slower  than  itself,  and  overtakes  another  either  by  con- 
junction or  aspect.  In  horary  astrology  it  is  a  good  omen  if  the  aspect 
be  good ;  but  if  by  an  evil  aspect,  it  is  said  to  denote  evil  or  difficulty 
■when  the  event  comes  to  pass.  Thus,  if  in  a  question  of  marriage  a 
light  planet  translates  the  hght  of  the  lord  of  the  7th  house  to  the 
Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  it  is  a  good  omen,  if  it  be  by  good  aspect,  and 
denotes  that  a  person  answering  the  description  of  such  translating 
planet  will  bring  the  parties  together,  and  they  will  be  eventually 
happy.  If  it  be  by  evil  aspect,  it  will  be  done  either  from  ill  motives 
or  will  be  attended  with  much  trouble  and  disappointment. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  37 

cation  of  that  sign  shalt  thou  judge,  as  thou  wouldest  judge 
of  any  Planet  in  such  an  House  from  the  Ascendant. 

81.  The  81st  is  to  consider.  Whether  the  Significator  be 
in  an  Angle  or  in  a  Succeedent  or  Cadent  House  ?  for  how- 
much  any  Planet  is  near  to  the  cusp  of  any  Angle  so  much 
is  he  the  stronger :  how  much  the  farther  so  much  the 
weaker;  and  by  how  much  sooner  he  shall  be  nearer  the  cusp 
of  a  Cadent  House,  so  much  shall  he  be  the  weaker;  how 
much  the  farther,  so  much  the  less  weak. 

82.  The  82nd  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Significator 
receive  disposition  or  virtue  from  any  Planet,  Fortune 
or  Infortune.  If  from  a  Fortune  it  signifies  good  ;  and  the 
better  if  such  Fortune  be  in  a  good  condition.  If  from  an 
Infortune,  the  contrary ;  and  so  much  the  worse  by  how 
much  the  more  weak  and  affected  he  is. 

83.  The  83rd  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Fortunes  and 
Infortunes  are  equally  strong  in  the  Question ;  for  that 
signifies  no  positive  judgment,  either  good  or  ill;  but  a 
kind  of  indiff*erency,  and  that  the  business  will  bring  neither 
gain  nor  loss. 

84.  The  84th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Fortunes  or 
Infortunes  are  strongest ;  for  if  both  be  strong,  and  the 
Fortunes  prevail  in  strength,  it  signifies  a  kind  of  mediocrity 
of  good ;  if  the  Infortunes  in  such  a  case  are  strongest, 
a  mediocrity  of  evil  not  in  excess  on  either  side. 

85.  The  85th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Part  of  Fortune 
fall  in  a  good  or  bad  place  of  the  Figure  ;  that  is  in  an 
Angle,  or  in  a  Succeedent  or  in  a  Cadent  House;  and  how  the 
same  is  aspected,  and  by  whom,  a  Fortune  or  an  Infortune  ? 
and  whether  it  be  in  reception  of  that  Planet  by  whom  it 
was  aspected  1  For  questions  may  sometimes  seem  good, 
but  the  Part  of  Fortune  happening  in  an  untoward  Place, 
weakens  it  much  and  renders  it  less  profitable  so  as  to 
deceive  the  Querent's  hopes.  And  on  the  contrar}?-  a  ques- 
tion may  seem  ill,  yet  the  Part  of  Fortune  happening  luckily, 


38 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


joined  with  a  good  Planet  tbat  receives  it,  etc.,  lessens  the 
evil,  and  not  so  much  happens  to  the  Querent  as  the  Figure 
otherwise  seems  to  threaten. 

86.  The  86th  is  to  consider,  Whether  either  of  the 
Infortunes  behold  the  Significator  both  Retrograde,  Cadent, 
Peregrine,  and  in  signs  contrary  to  their  respective  natures  ? 
for  then  they  bring  such  an  absolute  mischief  as  cannot  be 
avoided,  nor  averted  by  anything  but  God  alone.  And  if 
any  shall  be  born  under  such  positions,  he  will  always  be  a 
beggar,  let  him  do  what  he  can ;  or  if  any  House  be  built 
then,  no  man  shall  ever  live  happily,  or  get  money  in  it; 
but  by  losses  and  crosses  his  estates  and  goods  shall  moulder 
away,  and  come  to  nothing ;  and  his  most  probable  designs 
strangely  frustrated  and  destroyed,  unless  the  Divine 
Goodness  in  mercy  interpose. 

87.  The  87th  is  to  consider,  Novenarium  Lunse,  which 
is  a  thing  much  to  be  heeded,  for  it  often  hinders  the 
Astrologer  from  discovering  the  truth,  and  leads  him  into 
error,  not  knowing  the  cause  that  makes  him  deceive. 

88.  The  88th  is  to  consider,  the  Planet  from  whom 
not  only  the  Moon  separates,  how  he  is  disposed,  etc.,  but 
the  next  to  whom  she  is  joined,  so  that  there  be  not  above 
51  minutes'  distance  between  them,  the  first  signifying  what 
is  past,  the  second  what  is  now  present,  as  we  have  already 
said,  and  also  look  to  whom  she  will  be  next  joined  after 
separation  from  him  with  whom  she  is  at  present;  for  he 
will  signify  (according  as  he  is  disposed)  the  issue,  or  what 
is  to  come. 

89.  The  89th  is  to  consider.  The  Duodenariam  Lunee,  a 
thing  very  observable  in  many  cases,  even  more  than  divers 
things  that  we  have  said  ;  for  there  is  greatest  danger 
of  mistakes  in  abstruse  considerations,  and  such  as 
Astrologers,  rather  through  sloth  than  ignorance,  do  not 
regard ;  whereby  they  often  fall  into  disgrace  and  contempt 
of  the  rabble,  rather  than  take  a  little  pains. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


39 


90.  The  90th  is  to  consider,  Whether  the  Lord  of  the 
House  in  which  the  Sun  is,  and  of  that  wherein  the  Moon 
is,  and  also  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  all  oriental  and  in 
Angles,  (though  that  rarely  happens)  and  mutually  behold 
each  other  from  good  places  with  friendly  Aspect ;  for  these 
positions  shall  signify  the  greatest  good,  and  most  superla- 
tive fortune  imaginable.  If  they  shall  not  be  all  so  disposed 
the  remaining  part  shall  signify  prosperity  and  felicity 
proportionally  as  far  as  they  are  able,  though  not  in  so  vast 
a  measure. 

91.  The  91st  consideration,  Is  to  observe  in  Questions  or 
nativities,  whether  Mars  be  in  any  of  the  Angles  of  the 
Figure,  especially  in  Fixed  Signs ;  or  when  Scorpio  Ascends, 
for  then  he  destroys  all  the  good  signified  by  that  question, 
or  at  least  much  impedes  and  diminishes  it ;  Unless  Jupiter 
behold  him  with  a  Trine  or  Sextile ;  for  then  his  malice  is 
mitigated  ;  but  yet  as  Jupiter  is  either  strong  or  weak. 

92.  The  92nd  is  to  observe  in  Nativities  and  Questions 
especially  of  death,  whether  the  Lord  of  the  House  of  Death, 
or  Signiticator  of  Death,  or  Lord  of  the  House  in  which  the 
Lord  of  the  eighth  is  posited,  applies  to  the  Significator  of 
the  Native  or  Querent,  or  he  to  them ;  because  a  Planet  so 
affected  becomes  the  destroyer  of  Life,  and  kills  as  well  if  it 
be  a  Fortune  as  an  Infortune,  and  that  whether  there  be  a 
Reception  or  not. 

93.  The  93rd  is  to  consider,  If  the  Question  concerns  a 
thing  that  one  would  desire  of  another,  or  that  one  would 
get  out  of  a  secret  hidden  place,  whether  the  Significator  of 
the  Querent,  or  thing  inquired  after,  behold  Saturn  or  is 
corporally  joined  to  him  ;  or  whether  Saturn  be  in  the 
house  of  the  thing  inquired  after  ?  for  then  the  business  will 
hardly  be  done,  or  not  without  much  labour  and  trouble, 
and  more  tediousness  than  the  Querent  can  imagine. 

94.  The  94th  is  to  consider  in  Questions,  etc.,  whether 
the  Significator  of  the  thing  inquired  about  be  Cadent  from 


40 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


the  Ascendant,  or  other  Angles,  or  from  the  house  that 
signifies  the  thing  or  business  sought  after,  or  its  Lord  ?  or 
whether  he  be  Retrograde,  or  in  a  bad  condition  with  the 
Sun ;  or  whether  there  be  in  the  said  house,  signifying  the 
thing  inquired  after,  a  Planet  Cadent,  or  Retrograde,  or 
in  such  ill  condition  with  the  sun,  or  in  an  ill  place  from 
him,  or  ill  aspected  by  him;  for  any  of  these  things  signify  a 
hindrance  to  the  thing,  although  otherwise  the  Question 
seems  good  and  probable. 

95.  The  95th  is  whether  the  Planets  signifying  the  thing 
sought,  join  mutually  with  each  other;  for  that  signifies 
it  will  be  done ;  yet,  be  not  too  confident  to  judge  so,  till 
thou  hast  well  weighed  the  nature  of  the  sign  wherein  they 
are  joined,  whether  it  be  of  their  own  nature ;  for  then  it 
will  be  easy,  otherwise  difficulty;  or  scarce  at  all. 

96.  The  96th  is  to  consider  in  Questions  which  seem  to 
show,  that  what  is  enquired  after  shall  be  perfected,  whether 
the  significator  of  the  thing,  and  the  Moon  are  in  Angles ; 
for  if  they  be  both  above  25  degrees  from  Angles,  it  will 
not  be  accomplished ;  but  if  one  shall  and  the  other  shall 
not  be  so  far  oflf,  then  it  may  be  done  but  with  difliculty, 
unless  it  be  a  journey  ;  which  will  speed  well  enough  if  the 
significator  be  remote  from  Angles. 

97.  The  97th  is  to  consider.  In  what  climate  thou  re- 
ceivest  the  question;  for  judgment  must  be  varied  as  the 
ascensions  of  countries  and  climates  diff*er,  there  being  not 
the  order  in  the  ascensions  or  elevations  of  signs,  in  one 
climate  as  in  another,  nor  the  same  Ascendant  in  one  region 
as  in  another. 

Note  by  Lilly. — "  Beware  therefore  of  a  mistake  here,  for 
it  will  be  very  unhandsome  and  blameworthy;  for  what- 
ever part  thou  travellest  towards,  from  one  region  to 
another,  whether  from  the  East  to  the  West,  from  the  North 
to  the  South,  or  contrarily,  your  Ascendant  will  be  changed 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  41 

from  one  degree  from  East  to  West  in  Longitude  and  4  contra, 
and  from  the  North  to  South,  and  the  contrary.  But  some 
jocund  fools  or  monks,  in  their  cups,  may  arise  and  say,  If 
your  judgments  are  changed  according  to  the  situation  of 
Nations  they  are  false.  But  there  is  no  talking  to  such 
brutes,  they  neither  understand  nor  believe,  nor  is  anything 
probable  to  them  :  Yet  there  are  some  very  learned  men 
amongst  them,  such  as  '  Conradus  Brixiensis/  a  preaching 
Friar,  who  excellently  understands  Art  and  practiseth  it 
honestly.  Want  of  heeding  what  I  have  said  hath  made 
Astrologers  to  err,  and  1  doubt  doth  so  still,  for  right 
judgments  cannot  be  given  but  by  the  Ascendant  and  other 
Houses,  and  therefore  if  these  vary,  those  must  do  so  too. 
Therefore  you  should  have  Tables  of  Elevation  for  every 
Climate  and  Begion ;  yet  'tis  more  difficult  to  find  out  the 
difference  of  one  climate  from  another,  than  of  one  Region 
or  country  from  another,  according  to  the  Longitude :  for  if 
thou  hast  tables  of  the  elevation  of  the  signs  in  any  region 
from  East  to  West,  thou  mayst  by  guess  find  the  elevation 
in  another,  which  way  thou  pleasest,  either  towards  the 
East  or  West,  according  to  the  same  climate,  by  taking  the 
difference,  but  in  divers  climates  thou  canst  not  so  easily 
conjecture." 

98.  The  98th  is  to  observe,  whether  if  what  appears  by  the 
sign  likely  to  be  effected,  be  signified  by  the  planets  by 
corporal  conjunction,  or  aspect  or  translation  of  Light  ?  if 
by  either  of  the  two  first  the  thing  will  be  effected  by  the 
Querent,  and  the  party  enquired  of,  without  any  third  person 
intermeddling;  but  if  by  the  last  it  shall  be  done  by 
ambassadors,  friends,  or  some  person  interposing  himself ; 
and  it  shall  be  brought  to  pass  by  a  person  or  thing  signified 
by  that  House  whose  Lords  translate  the  lights  as  aforesaid. 
Thus  if  it  be  the  Lord  of  the  second,  it  will  be  done  by 
expenses,  or  a  piece  of  money ;  if  by  the  third,  by  some 


42 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


brother  or  the  like ;  if  by  the  fourth,  by  the  Father,  etc., 
according  to  the  respective  signification  of  each  House. 

99.  The  99th  is  to  consider  well  in  Questions,  Nativities, 
etc.,  what  will  certainly  come  of  them ;  for  sometimes  by 
the  Figure,  a  thing  seems  likely  to  be  absolutely  done  ;  but 
is  not  wholly,  but  in  part ;  sometimes  it  is  wholly  perfected, 
and  sometimes  neither  wholly  nor  in  part :  upon  which 
account  astrologers  are  often  blamed,  and  scarce  know  how 
to  excuse  themselves,  not  knowing  how  this  comes  to  pass, 
being  a  difficult  point,  and  of  a  most  subtle  disquisition ;  so 
that  the  ancients  would  not  meddle  with  it,  save  only  the 
most  honoured  '^Albumazar"  said  something  more  than  the 
rest,  whose  judgments  I  have  found  more  efficacious  and 
correct  than  others,  though  "  Ptolomy,"  the  great  explainer 
of  this  science,  must  be  acknowledged  more  curious  than  the 
rest.  Now  that  which  I  say  is  the  consideration  of  certain 
Fixed  Stars  : 

Note  by  Coley. — Note  that  these  fixed  stars  are  now 
removed  many  degrees  forwards  in  the  Ecliptic  than  they 
were  in  the  time  of  Bonatus  ;  in  respect  of  Longitude,  which 
ought  to  be  carefully  considered  by  the  industrious  As- 
trologer, which  I  shall  name,  whereof  some  are  of  the  nature 
of  the  Fortunes,  and  perfect  those  things  with  them  not  like 
to  be  perfected  by  the  significations  of  the  Planets ;  others 
are  of  the  nature  of  the  Infortunes,  which  suff'er  not  things 
to  be  perfected  according  to  the  Planets'  significations  :  of 
which  latter  there  are  some  in  every  sign,  as  in  Bonatus's 
time  there  were  two  in  the  Head  of  Aries  that  is  one,  in 
13°  45',  the  other  in  14°  45',  and  are  southern,  and  of  the 
nature  of  Saturn  and  Mars.  In  Taurus  are  six  stars,  the 
first  is  9°  55' ;  the  Pleiades,  which  yet  are  called  and 
counted  but  as  one,  and  are  of  the  nature  of  Mars  and  the 
Moon  ;  another  in  13°  2',  another  in  14°  45',  called  the  Devil, 
another  in  15°,  called  the  Devil's  Head,  another  in  the  belly 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  43 

of  Taurus,  19°  15',  called  Aldebaran,  which  are  all  of  the 
nature  of  Mars  and  Mercury.  In  Gemini  there  is  one  in  S°, 
called  the  "  shoulder  of  the  dog,"  of  the  nature  of  Mars  and 
Saturn;  another  in  10°  15'  of  the  nature  of  Mars,  called 
"the  Warrior";  another  in  17°  55';  another  in  18°  52', 
called  "  the  Witch,"  of  the  nature  of  O  and  J  •  In  Cancer 
there  is  one  in  2°  3',  called  the  Camel,  of  the  nature  of 
^2  and  ])  ;  another  in  7°  55' ;  another  in  13°,  called  the 
Western  Camel,  of  the  nature  of  O  and  ])  ;  another  in  the 
same  degree,  called  the  "  Foot  of  the  Dog,"  of  the  nature  of  ; 
and  another  in  17°  55'  of  the  same  nature.  In  Leo  there  is 
one  in  15°  55',  of  the  nature  of  .  In  Virgo  two,  one  in 
7°  11',  of  the  nature  of  ^ ;  the  other  in  15°,  of  the  nature  of  ^  . 
In  Libra  one  in  26°,  of  the  nature  of  .  In  Scorpio  three, 
one  in  1°  3',  another  in  8°  7',  another  in  9°,  all  of  the  nature 
of  c^.  In  Sagittarius  two  small  ones,  one  in  19°  2',  the  other 
in  21°  2',  of  the  nature  of  P2  •  Capricorn  two,  one  in  27°  2', 
the  other  in  29°  5',  both  of  the  nature  of  .  In  Aquarius 
one  in  9°  4',  of  the  nature  of  S  and  ^ .  In  Pisces  one  in 
4°  7'  of  the  nature  of  ^  and  5  • 

All  these  stars  are  hurtful  and  malevolent,  hindering 
and  destroying  things  after  they  seem  probable  to  be  accom- 
plished, and  therefore  to  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible. 
Here  'twill  not  be  superfluous  but  very  convenient  to  insert 
a  table  of  the  fixed  stars  that  have  small  latitude,  as  they  are 
now  placed,  Or  rectify  them  for  some  succeeding  years.* 

100.  The  100th  Consideration  is,  to  observe  the  Fixed 
stars  assisting  and  promoting  the  accomplishment  of  things, 
which  are  thus  situated.  In  Aries  there  are  two,  one 
in  5°  6',  of  the  nature  of  1/  and  another  in  the  26°  1'  of 
the  nature  of  1/ .  In  Taurus  three,  one  in  the  1°  3',  another 
in  8°  7',  and  the  last  in  9°  1',  all  of  the  nature  of  5,! .  In 
Gemini  are  two  stars  one  in  19°  2',  the  other  in  21°  8',  both 
*  This  table  is  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  book. 


44  THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 

of  the  nature  of  1/  and  of  the  second  magnitude.  In  Cancer 
likewise  two,  one  in  2°  2',  the  other  in  29°  5',  both  of  the 
nature  of  1/ .  In  Leo  one  in  9°  4',  of  the  nature  of  %  and  ? . 
In  Virgo  one  in  4°  T,  of  the  nature  of  ?  and  D .  In  Libra 
two,  both  of  the  nature  of  %  and  ? ,  one  in  13°  45',  the  other 
in  14°  45'.  In  Scorpio  four,  one  in  9°  55',  another  in  13°  1',  a 
third  in  14°  45',  the  last  in  19°  15',  all  of  the  nature  of  1/. 
In  Sagittarius  two,  one  in  10°  15',  the  other  in  7°  55',  both 
of  the  nature  of  1/ .  In  Capricorn  three,  one  2°  3',  another 
7°  55',  the  other  7°  55'_,  all  of  the  nature  oi  %.  In  Pisces 
two,  one  in  7°  11'  of  the  nature  of  ?,  the  other  in  14°  59' of 
the  nature  of  % .  Wherefore  always  when  thou  findest  the 
signification  in  a  corporal  conjunction  with  any  of  these, 
thou  mayst  pronounce  happiness  and  a  good  end.* 

101.  The  101st  Consideration  is.  To  mark  in  Nativities 
or  Questions,  which  Planet  is  the  cutter-ofF  of  life  or  years, 
or  hinderer  of  a  thing  from  being  done ;  for  he  it  is  who 
destroys  the  life  of  the  Native,  etc.,  who  is  strongest  in 
testimonies  of  dignities  or  power.  Yet  Messahala  concealed 
this,  and  discovered  the  secret  only  to  a  certain  scholar  of 
his,  who  out  of  pride  appropriated  the  same  to  himself. 
Now  after  thou  hast  found  who  is  this  destroyer,  etc.,  then 
see  to  whom  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  or  the  Moon  is 
joined  (who  participates  in  signification  of  everything,  as 

^  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  fixed  stars  increase  in  longi- 
tude at  the  annual  rate  of  50*25"''  but  their  latitudes  vary  very  little. 
The  right  ascensions  and  declinations  of  all  the  fixed  stars  mentioned 
in  the  two  foregoing  considerations,  together  with  many  others,  are 
given  every  year  in  the 'Nautical  Almanac,  so  that  their  places  can 
easily  be  computed  by  means  of  their  known  annual  differences,  for 
past  years  and  for  many  years  in  advance  if  necessary.  There  is  an 
excellent  article  on  the  Fixed  Stars  in  Wilson's  "  Dictionary  of 
Astrology,"  together  with  a  table  of  all  stars  which  are  worthy  of 
consideration  in  both  Horary  and  Genethlical  Astrology.  A  useful 
table  of  the  fixed  stars  will  be  found  in  "  The  Text-book  of 
Astrology,  Vol.  I.  Genethlialogy,"  by  Alfred  J.  Pearce  (London,  1879). 
They  are  computed  for  January  1, 1879. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


45 


we  have  said  before),  or  the  Lord  of  the  thing  enquired  after, 
and  Lord  of  the  house  of  the  moon,  or  one  or  more  of  them  ; 
for  if  it  be  joined  to  a  planet  Retrograde  or  Combust,  or 
cadent  from  the  Ascendant,  or  any  other  Angle,  or  to  any 
of  the  Infortunes  who  doth  not  receive  him ;  or  is  afflicted 
by  an  Infortune,  which  cuts  off  the  light  of  the  significator : 
the  thing  is  destroyed,  and  so  the  years  of  the  Native  are 
diminished  and  he  lives  not  long.  Further_,  If  the  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant,  or  the  Moon,  or  the  Lord  of  the  thing 
enquired  after,  be  joined  to  a  Planet  who  is  free  from  the 
conjunction  of  the  Infortunes,  and  so  is  safe  as  to  himself, 
but  is  joined  to  another  Planet  afflicted,  some  of  the  afore- 
said ways,  the  matter  shall  be  brought  to  nought,  even  after 
it  seems  accomplished,  and  the  Native's  life  shall  be  suddenly 
cut  off,  when  there  is  all  the  probability  that  may  be  of  the 
contrary :  and  this  will  also  happen  though  there  be  no 
conjunction  with  the  killing  Planet,  if  only  the  significator 
or  Moon  be  afflicted  in  manner  aforesaid. 

102.  The  102nd  Consideration  is,  Of  things  signified,  how 
they  shall  be  found  or  known,  and  from  what  significator 
they  are  to  be  taken  ?  which  must  be  from  the  significators 
of  the  Querent,  and  of  the  thing  Questioned  or  enquired 
after:  which  two  significators,  if  they  shall  be  joined  to- 
gether with  the  Moon  it  signifies  wholly  and  absolutely  the 
effect  of  the  thing;  if  not  joined,  then  the  contrary.  And 
from  the  conjunction  of  the  significators  we  ought  to  know 
why,  or  by  what  the  question  is  made.  And  by  the  Lord 
of  the  House  in  which  such  conjunction  happens,  we  know 
of  what  the  question  will  be,  or  the  end  thereof ;  for  if  that 
be  a  Fortune  it  will  be  good,  according  to  the  condition  and 
signification  of  such  Fortune,  and  the  House  wherein  he  is, 
and  signification  of  the  Lord  of  that  House,  and  of  the  place 
in  which  the  Lord  is  posited  of  that  House  wherein  itself 
is.  But  if  it  be  an  Infortune,  it  will  be  bad,  according  to 
the  signification  of  the  Infortune,  and  such  other  positions 


46 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


as  aforesaid.  If  the  Lord  of  the  House  or  Exaltation,  or  of 
any  two  smaller  Dignities,  casts  an  aspect,  or  there  be  a 
translation  of  Light,  you  may  know  by  that  the  question 
shall  be  brought  to  pass ;  but  if  there  be  none  of  these  it 
cannot  be  precisely  known,  but  it  will  be  by  or  from  a  cause 
not  yet  discovered  ;  and  by  the  aspects  of  the  Fortunes  or 
Infortunes  may  be  known  what  will  be  the  effects. 

103.  The  103rd  Consideration  is,  To  mind  in  Nativities 
and  general  Questions  in  what  House  the  Part  of  Fortune 
happens ;  for  from  the  things  signified  by  that  House  will 
the  Fortune  or  gain  of  the  Native  or  Querent  arise,  if  the 
same  be  well  disposed,  otherwise  the  same  will  be  cause  of 
his  misfortune  and  loss.* 

104.  The  104th  Consideration  is  To  observe  in  Nativities 
and  general  Questions  whether  the  significator  of  the 
Native  or  Querent  be  posited  in  the  Seventh  from  his  own 
House,  or  in  Opposition  to  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant ;  for 
he  will  not  in  such  case  signify  gain  from  the  things  signi- 
fied by  that  House,  but  rather  expense  and  loss. 

105.  The  105th  Consideration  is,  To  observe  in  Nativities 
or  general  Questions,  whether  that  an  Infortune,  unfor- 
tunate be  in  the  Seventh  ?  for  that  signifies  that  the  Native 
or  Querent  shall  not  live  in  peace  or  any  delight  with  his 
wives,  sweethearts,  or  companions,  but  will  perpetually  have 
brawls  and  quarrels  with  them :  it  seldom  happens  other- 
wise from  such  a  position.-|- 

106.  The  106th  Consideration  is,  To  consider  in  Nativities 
and  general  Questions,  if  a  Fortune  fortunate,  and  in  no 
way  afflicted  be  in  the  Seventh  ?  for  then  the  Native  or 

*  Wilson  and  most  modern  Astrologers  do  not  regard  the  "  Part 
of  fortune  "  in  Nativities.  In  Horary  Astrology  however  it  has  been 
proved  very  worthy  of  consideration. 

t  In  horary  questions  should  the  Querent  be  unmarried  an  infor- 
tune in  the  Seventh  house  would  then  of  course  affect  him  through 
or  by  means  of  his  open  enemies,  partners,  or  other  matters  or 
things  ruled  by  that  house. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  47 

Querent  shall  be  happy  in  good  wives  and  associates,  yet 
shall  have  many  rivals  and  persons  that  hate  him,  but 
rather  out  of  envy  than  cause,  so  that  he  shall  seldom 
bring  his  enterprises  and  designs  to  pass,  without  much 
labour  and  trouble. 

107.  The  107th  is.  To  consider  in  Nativities  and  general 
Questions,  whether  Mars  be  in  the  Second  or  in  the  Tenth, 
and  well  disposed;  for  it  denotes  that  the  Native  or  Querent 
shall  gain  a  Fortune  or  Estate  by  those  persons  that  deal  or 
work  in  Iron  and  Fire,  as  Smiths,  Furnacemen,  Glassmen, 
etc. :  or  in  Victualling  or  keeping  Inns,  Taverns,  etc.:  But  if 
Mars  be  weak  or  afflicted,  loss  and  damage  from  all  those.* 

108.  The  108th  is  to  consider,  If  neither  of  the  Planets 
beholds  two  Houses  ?  For  his  virtue  and  fortitude  shall  be 
in  that  wherein  he  hath  most  dignities,  and  which  is  most 
proper  for  him,  and  the  thing  he  signifies. 

109.  The  109th  is.  To  consider  whether  the  Lord  of  the 
Fifth  be  in  the  Seventh  afflicted  ?  for  then  the  Native  will 
never  be  happy  at  Feasts  or  Banquets ;  either  be  averse 
from  or  slighted  at  such  meetings,  or  some  afi:ront  put  upon 
him ;  nor  will  he  ever  go  neat  in  his  clothes,  nor  get  any 
credit  by  them. 

110.  The  110th  is.  To  consider  in  Nativities,  whether 
Scorpio  ascends  ?  for  such  a  Native  is  never  like  to  get 
any  great  preferment  in  the  Roman  Church :  because 
Cancer  [the  Exaltation  of  Jupiter,  natural  significator  of 
Clerks  (priests,  parsons,  etc.,  etc.)],  will  then  be  in  the  Ninth 
House,  which  signifies  the  Church,  and  Jupiter  is  an  enemy 
to  Mars,  who  is  lord  of  the  Ascendant. 

111.  The  111th  is,  To  consider  in  Nativities  and  Questions 
especially  of  Law  suits  and  controversies,  whether  the 
Dragon^s  tail  be  in  the  Seventh  ?  for  that  signifies  damage 

*  J ames  Wilson  (the[author  of  "  Dictionary  of  Astrology")  and  many 
others  are  of  opinion  that  under  any  circumstances  an  infortune  in 
the  second  house  is  undesirable  in  a  Genethlical  figure. 


48 


THE  ASTROLOGER  S  GUIDE. 


or  overthrow  to  the  Native's  enemies  and  prosperity  to  the 
Native  or  Querent,  because  the  Dragon's  Head  will  then  be  in 
the  Ascendant.  If  it  be  in  the  eighth  it  denotes  the  decay 
and  loss  of  their  estate  or  substance,  and  increase  of  the 
native's.  In  the  third,  prejudice  to  the  Native's  Brethren. 
In  the  fourtli,  to  his  Parents.  In  the  fifth,  to  his  children. 
In  the  sixth,  to  his  servants.  In  the  ninth,  to  his  journeys. 
In  the  tenth,  to  his  preferment.  In  the  eleventh,  to  his 
Friends.  In  the  twelfth,  to  his  cattle  of  the  greater  sort, 
etc.  And  so  to  all  other  things  signified  by  each  House 
respectively :  so  do  Saturn  and  Mars  also,  but  not  so  much. 
Likewise  'tis  observable  that  other  ill  positions  may  make 
void  the  said  significations,  but  not  so  much  as  Saturn  and 
Mars,  unless  they  themselves  are  significators  of  the  mis- 
chief, and  then  much  of  their  malice  is  abated. 

112.  The  112th  is  strictly  to  examine  and  regard  in  every 
Nativity  or  Question,  the  Ascendant;  for  whosoever  shall 
have  "  Yirgo  "  ascend  and  Mercury  in  a  good  condition,  or 
at  least  not  afflicted  ;  if  he  study  and  practise  Physic  he 
sha.ll  have  success  and  do  great  cures,  but  shall  be  unhappy 
in  his  salary  or  profit  thereby ;  not  being  able  to  get  his 
fees  of  most  of  his  Patients ;  and  besides,  shall  be  unhappy 
in  Law  suits.  But  if  he  follow  the  Law,  he  shall  be  unfor- 
tunate in  all  his  business,  and  slighted ;  his  words,  though 
never  so  prudent,  not  regarded,  no  not  by  them  for  whose 
advantage  he  speaks,  but  a  fool's  discourse  preferred,  and 
whatever  he  meddles  in  shall  turn  out  untoward,  and 
people  be  his  enemies  without  cause,  and  asperse  and  scan- 
dalize him,  they  know  not  why.  But  far  otherwise  will  it 
be  if  Sagittarius,  Taurus,  or  Pisces  ascend,  and  Jupiter, 
Venus  and  Mercury,  shall  be  in  the  Ascendant,  or  if  J upiter 
and  Venus  shall  happen  to  be  in  "  Zaminium,"  or  the  heart 
of  the  Sun,  whatever  the  Ascendant  be  the  native  shall  be 
admired  as  a  Prophet,  and  all  his  words  received  as  Oracles, 
or  the  dictates  of  destiny. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  49 

118.  The  113th  is  To  consider,  whether  either  of  the  la- 
fortunes  be  in  the  9th  House,  and  without  Dignity  ?  for  then 
the  Native  or  Querent  shall  be  often  blamed  and  accused, 
and  that  without  cause,  as  much  as  for  one.  But  if  a 
Fortune  be  there  well  affected  (especially  having  Dignity 
there)  he  shall  on  the  other  side  be  praised,  applauded,  and 
honoured,  whether  there  be  cause  or  reason  for  it  or  no. 

114.  The  114th  is  To  consider.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the 
Eighth  be  a  Fortune,  and  in  the  Second  ?  for  then  the 
Native  or  Querent  shall  gain  considerably  by  the  goods  of 
people  deceased,  of  his  enemies,  and  by  his  wives,  especially 
if  such  planet  shall  be  free  from  Impediment  or  have 
Dignities  there.  But  if  an  Infortune  be  there,  it  signifies 
loss  and  decay  of  the  Native's  estate,  unless  he  have  dignities 
there  and  be  otherwise  well  affected,  and  in  good  con- 
dition, for  then  it  will  be  little  or  no  prejudice;  but  with- 
out dignities,  and  in  an  ill  state,  it  wholly  and  totally 
destroys  and  ruins  all  hopes  of  estate. 

115.  The  115th  is,  To  consider,  Whether  the  Eighth 
House,  or  its  Lord  be  afflicted  ?  for  then  shall  the  Querent 
or  Native  be  damnified,  and  lose  an  estate  by  the  death  of  a 
wife,  which  she  enjoyed  for  life  or  the  like. 

116.  The  116th  is.  To  consider  which  of  the  Houses,  or 
their  Lords  are  afflicted,  or  under  impediment  ?  for  that 
signifies  that  hurt  and  damage  will  accrue  to  the  Native,  by 
reason  of  the  things  signified  by  that  House  :  and  so  on  the 
contrary,  if  they  are  Fortunes,  good  and  advantage  from 
the  same  things. 

117.  The  117th  is  to  consider.  If  the  Dragon's  Tail  be  in 
the  Fourth ;  for  that  signifies,  that  whatever  the  Native  or 
Querent  shall  get  shall  be  squandered  away,  and  come  to 
nothing;  and  wherever  it  is,  it  signifies  damage  to  the 
Native  in  and  from  that  House  represented. 

118.  The  118th  is,  to  consider  In  what  House  a  Fortune 
shall  be  fortunate  and  strong,  well  disposed,  and  not  afflicted ; 

4 


50 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


for  in  and  by  those  persons  or  things  by  that  House  signi- 
fied, shall  the  Native  or  Querent  gain  profit,  and  make 
his  fortune ;  and  so  on  the  contrary  of  a  House  that  is 
afflicted. 

119.  The  119th  is  to  consider,  If  the  Lord  of  the  second 
be  in  the  seventh,  and  the  Seventh  be  in  Aries,  Scorpio, 
Capricorn  or  Aquarius  ;  for  then  the  Native's  enemies  shall 
easily  take  away  his  goods  and  right :  and  if  he  associate 
himself  with  persons,  they  shall  rob  him :  and  his  wife  or 
mistress  shall  cheat  him,  and  steal  whatever  she  can  from 
him :  unless  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  in  Trine  or 
Sextile  to  the  Lord  of  the  Seventh,  or  in  other  Aspects  with 
reception. 

120.  The  120th  Consideration,  is  to  observe  whether  the 
Lords  of  any  of  these  Eight  Houses,  viz.,  the  third,  fourth, 
fifth,  sixth,  ninth,  tenth,  eleventh,  or  twelfth,  be  in  the 
Seventh  ?  for  which  soever  of  them  is  there,  the  person  by 
him  signified  will  prove  the  Native's  enemy,  unless  a 
perfect  reception,  with  some  good  aspect  as  Trine  or  Sextile 
intervene.  Yet  a  Square  or  Opposition  with  Reception  w^ill 
abate  the  enmity,  but  not  wholly  prevent  it.  Thus  if  it  be 
the  Lord  of  the  Third,  his  Brethren  will  prove  his 
enemies  ;  if  of  the  Fourth,  his  Parents ;  if  of  the  fifth  his 
children,  etc.,  nor  shall  he  gain  of  or  by  them  so  much  as  he 
shall  lose  another  time ;  or  if  any  of  them  sometimes  appear 
kindly,  it  will  be  but  from  the  teeth  outward,  and  for  their 
own  ends,  etc. 

121.  The  121st  is.  Whether  the  Moon  be  in  the  Eighth 
and  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  in  the  Ascendant ;  second, 
or  twelfth,  Retrograde  ?  for  then  the  Native  or  Querent 
will  not  be  Fortunate,  nor  have  any  luck  at  playing  at  dice 
or  any  other  gaming. 

122.  The  122nd  is.  Whether  the  Part  of  Fortune  be  in 
the  first  10°  of  the  Fourth  House,  with  the  Dragon's  Head, 
the  Moon,  Yenus  and  J upiter,  and  they  direct  ? — for  that 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


51 


signifies  that  the  Native  shall  be  lucky  in  discovering  and 
finding  out  hidden  treasure.  If  it  be  in  the  Second  10°,  or 
but  with  two  of  the  said  Planets,  he  shall  find  some,  but  not 
in  so  great  quantity.  In  the  last  10°,  and  with  but  one  less, 
and  yet  a  considerable  parcel ;  and  if  only  the  Part  of  For- 
tune be  there  not  afflicted,  then  a  small  quantity.  If  the 
Sun  behold  it  with  a  Trine  or  Sextile,  it  will  be  Gold  un- 
coined ;  if  the  Moon,  Silver ;  if  Jupiter,  a  mixture  of  Gold 
and  Silver,  etc.  If  Venus,  precious  stones,  Lockets,  and 
for  the  most  part  Women's  Ornaments.  But  if  they  be 
Ketrograde,  he  shall  discover  the  treasure,  but  not  for  him- 
self, another  shall  get  the  profit.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Eighth 
behold  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  with  a  Square  or  Oppo- 
sition, the  finder  shall  die  by  reason  of  it ;  but  if  it  be  with 
a  Trine  or  Sextile,  he  shall  only  catch  some  small  disease  or 
sickness.  If  the  Dragon's  Tail  be  there  instead  of  the 
Head,  he  shall  find  it,  but  it  shall  be  taken  from  him ;  or 
being  ignorant  what  it  is,  he  shall  give  it  away  almost  for 
nothing;  and  if  the  Moon  be  then  separated  from  the 
Lord  of  the  Ascendant  and  joined  to  an  Infortune  that 
afflicts  her,  he  to  whom  'tis  so  given  shall  have  little  profit 
by  it.  If  Mars  or  the  Lord  of  the  Eighth  behold  the  Lord 
of  the  Ascendant,  they  that  take  it  from  him  shall  kill 
him.  But  if  Mars  and  Saturn  shall  be  in  the  place  of 
Jupiter  and  Venus,  the  business  will  be  only  brass  or  copper 
or  lead,  and  if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  with  them,  the 
discoverer  is  wearied  with  it,  whatever  it  be,  whether  vile 
or  precious. 

123.  The  123rd  Consideration  is  to  observe  in  Nativities 
or  Questions:  Whether  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  in  Conjunc-\\ 
tion  in  one  and  the  same  minute,  both  according  to  Longi- 
tude and  Latitude,  and  any  of  the  Fortunes  in  the  Ascen- 
dant that  is  within  15'  above  the  cusp  thereof,  or  24'  below 
it;  for  that  signifies  that  the  Native  shall  be  happy  in 
getting  a  great  estate  and  heaping  up  of  money ;  but  if  they 

4—2 

ili^iVEliSlllf  Of  ilUi^OlS 


52 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


be  only  in  exact  Conjunction  to  Longitude,  and  not  accord- 
to  Latitude,  and  their  distance  one  from  the  other  be  with- 
in 15';  he  will  still  be  fortunate  in  acquiring  substance  ; 
but  so  much  the  less,  by  how  much  the  further  such  dis- 
tance is:  and  so  proportionately.  If  they  happen  to  be 
above  15'  distance,  the  same  thou  mayst  conclude  if  the 
Moon  shall  be  ill  the  very  minute  of  Opposition  to  the  Sun, 
and  a  Fortune  be  in  the  seventh,  which  signifies  the  estate 
of  the  Querent  or  Native  in  respect  of  his  wives,  com- 
panions, or  enemies.  And  if  at  that  time  of  birth  Taurus 
ascend,  and  the  Moon  be  there,  or  the  very  minute  ascend- 
ing, or  Leo  ascending,  and  the  Sun  in  the  minute  ascending, 
and  not  afflicted  by  either  of  the  Infortunes,  it  signifies 
that  the  Native  shall  get  much  money,  and  come  to  great 
preferment  and  honour;  but  if  either  of  the  Infortunes  be 
in  the  said  places  instead  of  a  Fortune,  it  denotes  loss  and 
destruction  of  estate  to  the  Native  or  Querent  by  or  on  the 
occasions  aforesaid. 

124.  The  124th  Consideration  is,  to  regard  in  Nativities 
and  Questions,  the  Significators  of  the  Querent's  and 
Native's  estate  and  also  of  his  preferment,  calling  or  profes- 
sion ;  which  thou  mayest  take  to  be  the  Lord  of  the  Tenth,, 
or  of  the  Ascendant,  if  the  other  shall  not  be  fit  to  signify 
the  same  :  for  if  the  Lord  or  Almuten  of  the  10th,  be  with 
the  Light  of  Time  or  erect  and  tall  from  it,  and  distant  60 
degrees  or  upwards  even  to  90  degrees:  if  it  be  one  of  the 
Superiors,  or  30  degrees  if  it  be  one  of  the  Inferiors,  and  in 
the  Angle  of  the  Tenth,  or  in  the  Ascendant  within  30 
minutes  above  the  cusp,  or  a  degree  and  a  half  below  it,  and 
not  afflicted;  it  signifies  that  the  Native  shall  attain  to  the 
Dignity  and  profession  of  his  Ancestors,  and  not  exceed  it^ 
yet  shall  be  more  skilful,  excellent,  and  perfect  therein  than 
any  of  them ;  but  if  there  be  in  either  of  the  said  Angles 
any  of  the  aforesaid  helping  and  fortunate  Fixed  Stars  with 
the  Planet  of  Fortune  or  any  of  the  Planets,  he  will  far 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  53 

surpass  his  forefathers  in  dignity.  And  if  such  Fixed 
Stars  shall  be  of  the  first  Magnitude  and  sole  Significators, 
the  Native  or  Querent  shall  be  raised  to  vast  honours  and 
riches,  almost  inestimable ;  which  if  beheld  b}^  the  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant,  then  his  fame  and  honour  lies  in  his  own 
person;  if  by  the  Lord  of  the  second,  in  his  riches;  if  by 
the  Lord  of  the  Tenth  in  his  offices,  command,  or  empire ; 
and  this  though  in  never  so  poor  and  vile  people ;  the 
meaner  their  condition  was,  to  so  much  the  greater  height 
shall  they  arrive.  But  this  shall  not  endure  long,  for  they 
seldom  go  beyond  27  or  30  years.  And  look,  how  much  the 
more  sublime  was  their  fortune,  by  so  much  the  more 
grievous,  miserable,  and  calamitous  shall  be  their  fall :  for 
they  shall  die  an  ignoble  filthy  death,  or  if  they  escape  it, 
the  same  shall  happen  to  their  next  successor. 

125.  The  125th  Consideration,  is  to  observe  in  ISTativities 
or  Questions  what  sign  ascends ;  if  it  be  the  sign  of  a  Planet 
that  hath  two  Houses,  the  exercise  or  troubles  of  the  Native 
or  Querent  shall  be  chiefly  in  those  things  signified  by  the 
other  House  of  the  said  Planet,  which  shall  lightly  happen 
to  him  and  for  the  most  part  through  his  own  means.  As 
if  the  Ascendant  be  in  Aries,  he  shall  be  excused  in  those 
things  as  shall  be  the  cause  of  his  own  death  or  fall  because 
Scorpio  the  other  House  of  Mars  will  be  then  in  the  Eighth 
House  :  but  if  Mars  be  well  disposed  and  the  Part  of  For- 
tune happen  in  the  Eighth  he  shall  be  very  fortunate  in  all 
things  signified  by  that  House.  If  Taurus  ascend  he  shall 
be  exercised  in  those  things  as  shall  cause  his  own  weakness, 
because  Libra  which  is  the  other  House  of  Venus  will  be 
then  the  Sixth  House.  But  if  Venus  be  well  disposed,  and 
part  of  Fortune  in  the  Sixth,  he  shall  be  most  lucky  in 
things  appertaining  to  the  Sixth  House^^  If  the  Ascendant 
be  in  Gemini  he  shall  be  exercised  in  such  things  as  shall 
occasion  his  being  taken;  because  Virgo,  Mercury's  other 
House,  will  be  on  the  fourth :  but  if  Mercury  be  well  dis- 


54 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


posed  and  part  of  fortune  in  the  fourth,  he  will  be  pros- 
perous in  things  belonging  to  the  Fourth  House.  If  Yirgo 
ascend,  he  will  be  exercised  in  things  that  will  gain  him 
honour  and  power,  because  Gemini,  Mercury's  other  House, 
is  the  tenth.  If  Mercury  be  then  in  Conjunction  with 
Part  of  Fortune  and  in  the  Ascendant,  he  shall  acquire  as  it 
were  a  king's  revenue.  But  if  Mercury  be  in  the  tenth 
with  the  Part  of  Empire,  fortunate  and  strong,  he  shall 
undoubtedly  obtain  a  Kingdom  or  supreme  command;  and 
if  with  this  Part  of  Fortune  and  the  Moon  be  also  in  the 
Tenth,  he  will  be  a  mighty  Prince  iofallibly.  If  Libra 
ascend,  he  shall  be  exercised  in  things  that  shall  hasten  his 
own  death,  because  Taurus  the  other  House  of  Venus  will 
be  then  in  the  Eighth.  But  if  Venys  be  well  disposed  and 
Part  of  Fortune  in  the  Eighth  he  will  be  lucky  in  things 
represented  by  the  Eighth  House :  and  so  of  any  other 
sign.  Scorpio  ascending  the  JSTative  or  Querent  shall  bring 
diseases  on  himself  because  Aries  is  the  sixth.  Sagittarius 
ascending,  he  shall  fool  himself  into  captivity  because  Pisces 
is  on  the  Fourth.  Capricorn  ascending,  he  shall  gain  much 
by  his  industry,  for  Aquarius  is  then  on  the  second  House. 
But  if  Saturn  be  ill  disposed  he  shall  squander  away  and 
waste  his  own  substance  idly.  If  Aquarius  ascend  he  shall 
procure  himself  many  secret  enemies,  because  Capricorn  will 
be  then  in  the  Twelfth  House.  If  Pisces  ascend,  he  shall 
raise  himself  to  honour,  etc. 

126.  The  126th  Consideration  is,  to  take  notice  in 
Nativities  and  Questions,  whether  Mercury  be  significator 
wholly  or  in  part,  fortunate  and  strong,  and  in  Capricorn 
or  Aquarius  ?  for  then  the  l^ative  shall  be  of  profound  and 
piercing  wit,  and  great  understanding ;  one  that  shall  dive 
into  the  bottom  of  things,  and  see  from  the  beginning  what 
the  issue  will  be ;  and  so  much  the  more  if  Saturn  fortunate 
shall  behold  Mercury  with  a  good  aspect,  especially  if  Mer- 
cury be  in  Aquarius,  which  is  the  delight  of  Saturn :  and 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BON  AT  US.  55 

still  more  if  a  Fortune  shall  be  with  Mercury,  and  he  with 
one  of  the  propitious  Fixed  Stars.  But  if  Mercury  be  in 
Aries  or  Scorpio,  the  Native  will  be  bold,  Perfidious,  incon- 
constant,  arrogant,  and  yet  quick  of  apprehension ;  rather 
nimble  to  repeat  or  find  out  things  said  by  others  than  in- 
vent them  himself. 

127.  The  127th  Consideration  is,  to  observe  in  Nativities, 
if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  Saturn  or  Mars,  and  sole 
Lord  of  the  Nativity,  without  any  Fortune  partaking  in  the 
dominion,the  taste  or  smelling  of  the  native  or  his  complexion 
shall  not  be  like  those  of  other  men,  for  if  it  be  Saturn,  he 
shall  delight  in  sour  or  insipid  things,  as  "  Halion  Ptolomy  " 
avers ;  if  it  be  Mars,  in  sharp  and  bitter,  flesh  half  stinking, 
wine  dead,  and  palld  aloes,  snuffs  of  candles,  dung,  etc.,  as 
also  with  filthy,  dirt}^,  unhandsome  women ;  more  than  in 
others ;  or  if  it  be  a  woman,  in  the  homeliest  men,  etc^ 

128.  The  128th  Consideration  is,  in  Nativities,  whether 
the  Ascendant  be  a  human  sign  or  the  Lord  of  it  in  a 
human  sign  ?  for  that  signifies  the  native  an  honest,  sociable, 
and  neighbourly  man,  more  especially  if  both  happen  to- 
gether. But  if  the  Ascendant  carry  the  similitude  of  some 
creatures  which  men  use  to  labour  with,  as  Aries,  Taurus, 
the  last  part  of  Sagittarius  and  Capricorn,  the  Native  is  very 
submissive  and  humble  to  men,  yet  very  sociable.  But  if  it 
be  a  sign  half-feral,  as  Cancer  and  Pisces,  he  will  be  yet  less 
sociable ;  but  if  it  be  feral,  furious  or  salvane  sign,  as  Leo 
and  Scorpio,  he  will  be  of  a  brutish  savage  temper,  delight- 
ing in  the  woods,  hunting  and  living  upon  spoils  and  rapine  ; 
caring  not  to  associate  himself  with  men,  so  that  he  seldom 
remains  long  with  his  own  Parents  or  nearest  Relations. 

129.  The  129th  Consideration  is,  to  observe  in  Nativities, 
whether  the  Moon  be  in  Opposition  to  the  Sun,  with  any  of 
the  stars  called  "cloudy,"  which  are  Althazaic,"  and  the 
"  Head  of  Gemini,"  or  in  a  place  called  "  The  Place  of  falling 
into  the  water,"  which  Aquarius  spouts  forth,  or  the  drops 


56 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


of  the  Lion,  said  to  be  near  his  heart,  and  others  which  by 
reason  of  their  mixture  with  each  other  do  not  shine  dis- 
tinctly (nebulous  stars).  For  when  the  Moon  shall  not  be 
above  10  minutes'  distance  from  them,  according  to  Longitude 
and  Latitude,  it  seems  unavoidable  that  the  native  shall 
have  diseases  in  his  eyes  ;  not  to  be  remedied  by  any  human 
help  or  medicine.  If  the  Moon  be  then  Occidental  in  an 
Angle  and  Mars  and  Saturn  likewise  Occidental,  not  far 
distant  from  her,  or  opposing  the  Sun  in  any  of  the  Angles : 
it  signifies  that  the  native  shall  be  blind  of  both  eyes  at  his 
death ;  nor  does  there  appear  any  way  whereby  it  may  be 
prevented ;  but  if  it  be  not  of  luminaries,  but  only  one,  he 
shall  lose  but  one  eye,  and  if  it  be  Sol  and  a  man  the  right 
eye,  if  a  woman  the  left  eye ;  but  if  it  be  the  Moon  and  a 
man,  the  left  eye ;  but  if  a  woman,  the  right  eye. 

130.  The  130th  Consideration  is,  to  regard  in  Nativities 
whether  the  Moon  be  joined  with  Mercury  by  Body  or 
Aspect,  or  there  be  a  translation  of  light  by  any  planet 
between  them  ?  if  there  be  nothing  of  this  and  the  sign 
ascending  be  neither  of  the  nature  of  Mercury  or  the  Moon  ; 
and  Saturn  in  a  diurnal  nativity  and  Mars  in  a  nocturnal, 
and  one  be  in  an  Angle,  the  native  will  be  mad,  distracted, 
troubled  with  fits,  a  fool  or  at  least  exceeding  forgetful,  unless 
a  Fortune  very  strong  shall  at  the  same  time  behold  the 
Ascendant,  Mercury,  or  the  Moon :  and  so  much  the  worse 
if  the  Angle  wherein  such  Infortune  is,  happen  to  be 
Cancer,  which  is  the  exaltation  of  Jupiter,  or  Virgo  the 
exaltation  of  Mercury,  or  Pisces  the  exaltation  of  Venus. 
The  reason  is  because  the  Moon  in  ISTativities  is  the  general 
Significatrix  of  the  native's  Person ;  and  the  Planet  with 
whom  she  is  joined  of  his  faculties  and  powers ;  and  there- 
fore if  she  be  corporally  joined  or  applying  to  such  Planet, 
the  native  will  prove  of  good  understanding,  and  very  well 
retain  his  senses  and  intellectuals.  And  if  Mercury  be  in 
Capricorn  or  Aquarius,  not  afflicted,  but  in  good  condition, 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


57 


the  native  will  be  of  au  exceeding  wit,  and  a  great  Philo- 
sopher ;  and  if  Jupiter  and  Venus  be  in  (Zamini  Solis)  he 
will  prove  a  Hermit  or  kind  of  Prophet,  whose  words  shall 
be  received  as  Oracles  beyond  those  of  other  men. 

131.  The  131st  Consideration  is,  To  take  notice  in  the 
Nativity  of  a  man,  whether  the  Sun  and  Moon  be  both  in 
Masculine  Signs,  or  both  in  one  Masculine  Quarter  or  one 
Masculine  Sign ;  for  if  so,  it  signifies  that  the  native's  acts 
and  temper  shall  be  naturally  such  as  belong  to  men.  But 
in  a  woman's  Nativity,  the  Luminaries  so  disposed,  make  a 
kind  of  Virago,  one  that  shall  despise  men,  and  obtrude  her- 
self into  their  affairs  :  and  such  a  one,  if  she  marry,  will  be 
sure  to  wear  the  breeches.  If  Venus  and  Mars  shall  be  both 
in  Masculine  Signs,  the  native  will  be  moderately  affected 
towards  the  delights  of  Venus,  and  use  them  according  to 
nature  and  law  ;  but  if  they  happen  to  be  Oriental,  he  will 
be  more  fallacious  and  immoderate,  inclinable  to  incest, 
sodomy,  etc.  But  if  they  be  Occidental  and  in  Feminine 
Signs,  his  spirits  will  be  nasty  and  brutish ;  and  so  much 
the  more,  if  Saturn  cast  any  Aspect  to  them.  But  if  it  be  a 
Woman,  and  Mars  and  Venus  Oriental  and  in  Masculine 
Signs,  she  will  abhor  men's  embraces,  and  take  no  delight 
therein,  but  rather  please -herself  with  some  little  wanton- 
ness with  persons  of  her  own  sex.  But  if  Mars  and  Venus 
be  in  Feminine  Signs  and  Occidental,  she  will  love  and  take 
delight  in  men's  kindness.  And  Ptolomy  in  his  Centiloquium 
affirms.  That  if  Venus  be  joined  with  Saturn  in  a  Nativity, 
and  have  Dignities  in  the  Seventh,  The  Native  shall  be 
somewhat  fault}^  and  untoward  in  his  venereal  caresses. 

182.  The  132nd  is  to  mark  in  Nativities,  Whether  Mars 
be  corporally  joined  with  a  certain  Fiery  star  of  his  own 
nature  in  Taurus,  called  "Agol,"*  so  that  they  are  not 

*  Caput  Algol  (B  Persei),  a  star  of  the]^2nd  magnitude,  now  in 
24  degrees  17  minutes  of  Taurus  of  the  nature  of  Saturn  and 
Jupiter.  It  is  held  to  be  the  most  unfortunate,  violent  and  dangerous 
fixed  Star  in  the  heavens. 


58 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


above  16  minutes  asunder,  Mars  applying  thereunto  and  the 
Lord  of  the  House  wherein  the  Luminary,  for  the  time  ruling 
is  pointed,  which  is  called  the  Lord  "  Anaubse or  of  its 
Exaltation,  and  two  others  of  its  Dignities,  and  shall  be  in 
Opposition  or  Square  of  Mars,  and  neither  of  the  Fortunes 
shall  behold  the  Ascendant,  nor  be  pointed  in  the  Eighth 
House ;  it  undoubtedly  signifies  the  native  shall  be  beheaded. 
And  if  Mars  shall  not  be  distant  from  it  in  Latitude  above 
6  minutes,  it  will  infallibly  happen  so ;  not  to  be  avoided 
but  by  God  alone.  And  though  a  Fortune,  Retrograde,  or 
Combust  should  behold  the  Ascendant,  yet  it  will  scarce 
preserve  him  from  beheading  ;  only  in  such  case  it  may 
happen  not  to  be  occasioned  by  his  own  fault :  for  a  Fortune 
in  such  a  case  not  impedited,  may  save  him  from  such  an 
ill  death,  and  permit  him  to  die  in  his  bed,  but  then  it  will 
be  of  some  capital  disease,  proceeding  from  a  hot  house,  and 
this  before  he  comes  to  be  fifty  years  of  age.  But  if  Mars 
shall  not  be  thus  affected,  yet  if  an  Infortune  be  in  the 
Eighth,  the  native  shall  come  to  an  untimely  or  ignominious 
end ;  but  if  a  Fortune  be  there  in  good  state,  he  shall  expire 
naturally ;  but  if  such  Fortune  be  afflicted^  he  shall  die  of 
some  mischance  coming  upon  him. 

Note  by  Lilly. — Ptolomy  in  his  "  Centiloquium  "  tells  us, 
"  That  if  the  Light  of  the  Time  shall  happen  to  be  in  the 
Mid-heaven  (I  say  in  the  conditions  aforesaid)  such  native 
shall  be  hanged.  If  either  of  the  Infortunes  be  in  Gemini, 
and  the  other  in  Pisces,  his  hands  or  feet  shall  be  cut  off", 
according  to  the  signification  of  the  sign  wherein  the  Planet 
is  pointed  which  is  most  malevolent.  If  Mars  be  in  con- 
junction with  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  in  Leo,  and  hath 
no  Dignities  in  the  Ascendant,  nor  neither  of  the  Fortunes 
in  the  Eighth,  the  native  shall  be  burnt  to  death  ;  and  if 
Mars  be  then  Retrograde,  Combust,  or  in  his  Fall,  it  will  be 
for  some  crime,  otherwise  by  mischance  or  unjustly.  Ptolomy 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  59 

saith  that,  If  Saturn,  in  a  Nativity,  be  in  the  mid-heaven 
and  the  Planet  to  which  he  is  *  Anauba '  (a  Depositer)  be  in 
opposition  to  him,  and  a  dry  sign  on  the  Cusp  of  the  Fourth, 
the  native  shall  be  knocked  on  the  head,  or  die  by  some 
ruins  falling  on  him ;  but  if  a  moist  sign  be  there  he  shall 
be  drowned;  but  if  it  be  an  human  sign,  he  will  be  strangled. 
It  Mars  or  Saturn  be  in  the  Ascendant  at  birth,  and  Pere- 
grine, the  native  shall  have  a  scar  or  mark  on  his  head  or 
face ;  if  the  Infortune  be  afflicted.  Combust  or  Ketrograde, 
the  same  will  be  very  deformed,  and  much  disfigure  him, 
otherwise  not." 

133.  The  133rd  Consideration  is,  To  mark  in  Nativities, 
whether  Gemini  or  Sagittarius  ascend,  and  whether  its  Lord 
be  well  disposed,  that  is,  fortunate  and  strong,  and  likewise 
the  Moon ;  for  that  signifies  that  if  the  native  live,  he  will 
get  great  riches.  If  Virgo  or  Pisces  ascend  and  its  Lord  or 
the  Moon  be  well  aflfected,  he  shall  get  money  and  lay  the 
same  out  well,  and  live  splendidly,  being  beloved  for  his 
generosity  and  bounty.  But  in  the  other  case  where  the 
Ascendant  is  Gemini  or  Sagittarius,  he  will  not  be  so  liberal, 
but  very  frugal  and  sparing ;  besides,  he  who  hath  Gemini 
or  Yirgo  for  his  Ascendant  may  lose  his  estate  and  come  to 
want;  but  he  that  hath  Sagittarius  or  Pisces  shall  never 
lose  his  means,  nor  fall  into  poverty.  If  Aries,  Scorpio, 
Capricorn,  or  Aquarius  ascend,  the  native  will  be  miserably 
covetous.  If  Jupiter  behold  the  Ascendant,  he  may  some- 
what mitigate  the  sordid  humour,  but  will  not  wholly 
prevent  or  take  it  away. 

134.  The  134th  is,  to  mind  in  Nativities,  whether  Mars  or 
Venus  be  in  the  Sixth,  and  likewise  well  disposed  ?  for  that 
signifies  that  the  native  shall  be  not  really  fit  for  Physic, 
and  grow  a  perfect  doctor  in  every  part  of  the  Art.  If 
Mercury  be  in  conjunction  with  Venus  and  she  Retrograde, 
he  will  make  naturally  a  good  singer  ;  but  if  Mercury  be  in 


€0 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


the  Twelfth  not  afflicted,  he  will  be  studious  and  famous  in 
most  sciences,  especially  Philosophy. 

135.  The  135th  Consideration  is,  To  consider  in  Nativities, 
whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  and  the  Moon,  and 
Jupiter,  and  Venus,  are  either  all  in  the  Ascendant,  or 
whether  J upiter  and  Venus  behold  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant, 
and  the  Moon  in  the  Ascendant  by  a  Trine  or  Sextile,  and 
free  from  affliction  ?  for  then  the  native  will  prove  very 
strong  and  courageous ;  and  none  will  dare  to  disobey  his 
commands. 

136.  The  136th  Consideration  is,  To  note  in  the  Nativities 
of  Kings  and  rich  men,  and  such  grandees  as  are  fit  to  bear 
rule,  whether  both  Luminaries  are  in  the  Degrees  of  their 
Exaltations,  or  in  their  own  Houses,  in  the  same  degree  one 
with  the  other,  and  free  from  affliction  ?  for  this  signifies 
that  the  native  shall  obtain  great  honours ;  for  he  shall  be 
made  Emperor,  or  something  like  it ;  so  that  he  shall  be  as 
it  were  monarch  of  the  world,  which  shall  continue  to  the 
fourth  generation  of  his  posterity.  But  if  all  the  Planets 
below  Jupiter  shall  be  disposed  of  by  him  and  he  shall 
receive  virtue  from  every  of  them,  notwithstanding  the 
condition  aforesaid,  and  afterwards  commit  both  them  and 
himself  to  Saturn,  and  both  be  Oriental  from  the  Sun  and 
in  Angles,  The  native  will  be  a  person  of  great  renown  and 
power,  although  perhaps  not  with  the  title  of  king ;  but  his 
fame  shall  endure  for  a  long  time,  that  is  to  say,  all  his  life- 
time ;  and  after  his  death  for  three  revolutions  of  Saturn,  or 
longer. 

137.  The  137th  is.  To  see  Whether  Mercury  be  in  conjunc- 
tion with  Saturn  in  the  Ascendant  ?  for  that  signifies  that 
the  native  is  a  foolish  talkative  fellow,  that  would  be  counted 
wise;  he  shall  speak  ill  of  both  men  and  women;  the  greatest 
wit  he  hath  is  to  invent  many  lies;  nor  doth  he  ever  open 
his  mouth,  but  something  of  untruth  appears  intermixed 
with  his  discourse :  so  natural  it  will  be  for  him  to  tell  lies. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  61 

Saturn  gives  him  a  foul  tongue,  and  Mercury  a  sharpness  of 
malice  to  employ  it. 

138.  The  138th  is  to  see  in  Nativities,  Whether  the  two 
Infortunes  are  in  the  Fourth  House,  or  whether  the  Angles 
are  possessed  with  moveable  signs,  and  Mars  and  Saturn  in 
them  ?  for  then  the  native  will  be  poor,  wretched,  and  un- 
fortunate, above  all  others,  all  his  lifetime,  unless  Jupiter, 
or  the  Lord  of  the  Triplicity  ascending  prevent. 

139.  The  139th  is,  To  be  careful,  both  in  Nativities  and 
Questions,  where  the  Dragon's  Tail  is  ?  for  that  signifies 
the  wasting  and  destruction  of  the  thing  signified  by  that 
House,  and  especially  if  it  relate  to  gain ;  for  in  the  first  it 
signifies  expenses,  and  loss  of  gain  to  the  Querent,  from  or 
by  reason  of  his  person  ;  in  the  2nd,  destruction,  and  loss  of 
money  and  substance ;  in  the  3rd,  loss  by  means  of  Brethren^ 
Sisters,  Neighbours,  etc. ;  in  the  fourth,  damage  that  one 
shall  sustain  by  one's  Grandfather,  Father-in-law,  and  such 
things  relating  to  Inheritances;  and  that  the  Native  shall 
change  Houses  often,  and  get  little  by  it ;  in  the  5th,  damage 
from  or  by  reason  of  children ;  in  the  6tb,  losses  by  servants 
or  small  cattle  ;  in  the  seventh,  loss  by  Women,  Companions, 
or  open  Enemies ;  in  the  9th,  loss  by  Keligious  Men,  and  on 
the  account  of  Religion;  in  the  10th,  by  or  in  his  prefer- 
ments, honours,  etc. ;  in  the  Eleventh^  loss  by  his  Friends,  or 
for  their  sakes  ;  and  in  the  Twelfth,  damage  sustained  by 
great  Cattle,  or  by  means  of  hidden  enemies.* 

*  Our  author  has  left  out  the  Eighth  house.  Modern  Astrologers 
do  not  consider  the  effects  of  the  Dragon's  Head  or  Tail.  If  how- 
ever they  are  worthy  of  consideration,  the  effect  of  the  Dragon's  Tail 
in  the  eighth  house  would  be  to  entail  loss  on  the  Native  or  Querent's 
wife's  money,  goods,  etc.,  it  would  also  prejudice  the  money,  goods, 
chattels,  etc.,  of  his  partners,  open  enemies,  and  opponents  in  law 
suits,  and  would  be  generally  unfavourable  to  such  matters  or  things 
as  are  ruled  by  the  eighth  house,  having  due  regard  to  other  testi- 
monies shown  in  the  figure. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  with  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  the  8th 


62 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


140.  The  140th  Consideration  is,  to  see  whether  the 
Significator  of  the  thing  in  question,  or  the  Moon  be  so 
weak  that  it  cannot  bring  the  matter  to  perfection  ?  and  if 
they  be,  take  the  Significator  of  the  Querent  and  thing 
inquired  after,  and  subtract  the  lesser  from  the  greater,  and 
add  to  the  remainder  the  degrees  of  the  sign  Ascending,  and 
project  what  they  amount  unto  from  the  Ascendant,  and 
observe  where  it  happens  ;  for  the  Lord  of  that  sign  signifies 
what  was  enquired  of  and  according  to  his  conditions  shalt 
thou  give  judgment,  as  thou  findest  him  fortunate  and 
strong,  or  unfortunate  and  weak.  For  if  the  business 
concern  a  man's  estate,  and  he  be  placed  in  the  Second,  as 
he  is — so  shall  the  Querent^s  estate  prove ;  if  in  the  third, 
the  Brethren,  Neighbours,  etc.,  etc.,  will  be  disposed 
accordingly ;  in  the  fourth,  those  of  greatest  Relations  ;  in 
the  Fifth  the  Children ;  in  the  Sixth  Servants ;  in  the 
Seventh,  Wives ;  in  the  8th  Wives'  portions  ;  in  the  9tli 
Long  journeys  ;  in  the  lOth  his  preferments ;  in  the  llth  his 
Friends ;  in  the  Twelfth,  his  secret  Enemies. 

141.  The  141st  Is  to  consider  in  Nativities  the  gifts  and 
properties  bestowed  on  men  by  the  fixed  Stars,  and  how 
long  they  continue,  together  with  the  reason  why  they 
prove,  not  lasting  as  those  which  proceed  from  the  Planets, 
since  it  seems  a  little  probable  that  they  should  continue 
longer  than  those  ;  of  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met 
with  anything  in  the  Ancients,  save  only  that  "  Ptolomy  " 
in  his  Centiloquium  says,  The  fixed  Stars  sometimes  confer 
exceeding  great  benefits ;  but  oftentimes  they  end  ill.  And 
"  Almansa "  in  his  Treatise  to  the  Great  King  of  the 
Saracens,  says  that  the  Fixed  Stars  bestow  notable  gifts, 


\.  house  the  Querent  or  Native  has  the  Dragon's  Head  in  the  2nd 
House  (that  of  wealth)  and  therefore  but  little  damage  could  accrue 
to  the  Querent  or  Native  through  loss  of  his  or  her  actual  personal 
money,  goods,  chattels,  etc.,  according  to  this  single  testimony. 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


63 


and  raise  from  poverty  to  happiness  and  high  degree  more 
than  any  of  the  seven  planets  :  Now  the  reason  that  the 
gifts  of  the  fixed  stars  to  men,  abide  less  with  them  than 
those  given  by  the  Planets  is,  because  the  fixed  Stars  being 
the  Agents,  and  men  the  Patients;  the  subject  on  which 
they  are  to  operate  are  not  agreeable  to  them,  nor  are  born 
to  be  able  to  receive  their  impression  ;  for  it  is  requisite  that 
there  should  be  some  conformity  and  likeness,  or  agreeable- 
ness  between  the  Agent  and  the  Patient ;  but  the  fixed 
stars  are  most  slow  in  motion;  and  consequently  in 
mutation,  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  their  impressions 
require  subjects  and  patients  of  the  same  nature ;  that 
is  to  say,  such  as  are  the  most  lasting,  and  carry  a  con- 
formity with  them  to  perfect  or  accomplish  their  effects: 
For  the  Revolution  of  the  Fixed  Stars  is  finished,  but  in  six 
and  thirty  thousand  years,  but  the  "  Viventhipolis  "  or  life 
of  man,  generally  exceeds  not  three  revolutions  of  Saturn  ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  space  of  ninety  years ;  very  few  exceed 
that  age,  though  possibly  some  may  by  the  addition  of  the 
years  of  some  Planets  to  the  years  of  the  "  Alcocoden"  in 
their  Nativities,  which  bears  no  conformity  or  proportion 
with  86,000  years  to  complete  the  effects  of  their  influences. 
And  therefore  as  an  Eagle  cannot  exercise  the  complement 
of  her  flight  or  power  on  a  Fly,  nor  a  Stone  coming  forth 
(a  Sunda  trabathi)  do  any  great  execution  (in  Musciovem) 
no  more  can  the  Fixed  Stars  complete  the  eff'ects  of  their 
impressions  ;  and  therefore  their  gifts  or  the  good  promised 
by  them  continue  no  longer  with  men,  because  men  are  of 
so  small  a  duration,  and  subject  to  a  swift  mutability  in 
respect  of  their  Motion.  And  upon  this  is  that  Aphorism 
grounded,  that  Advises  to  make  use  of  Fixed  Stars  in  the 
Foundation  of  Cities,  but  of  Planets  in  the  erection  of 
Houses ;  because  Cities  are  generally  of  the  longest  con- 
tinuance amongst  corruptible  things,  and  far  more  durable 
than  particular  Houses ;  for  these   in  respect  of  their 


64 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


individuals  do  not  endure  always,  whereas  Cities  remain  by 
a  successive  building  and  rebuilding  of  Houses ;  and  there- 
fore though  Castles  are  very  lasting,  yet  are  they  not  equal 
in  this  respect  to  Cities;  so  that  although  we  may  use 
the  superior  planets  in  elections  for  building  of  Castles,  it  is 
better  to  take  Fixed  Stars ;  yet  still  because  Cities  are  of 
longer  continuance  than  Castles,  they  are  more  appropriated 
to  the  fixed  Stars,  whose  Subjects  they  are.  For  the 
impression  which  a  solid  thing  makes  in  a  more  solid  thing, 
continues  much  longer  than  that  which  it  makes  on  a  less 
solid  thing  ;  and  far  less  in  a  thing  not  solid,  than  a  thing 
somewhat  solid  ;  and  yet  less  in  a  very  slippery  transient 
thing,  than  in  a  thing  less  lubricous  or  changeable.  Hence 
the  impressions .  which  the  Fixed  Stars  make  on  Cities, 
continue  longer  than  those  on  Castles ;  because  Cities  are 
more  correlative  to  them  in  length  of  time,  and  accordingly 
those  of  Castles  more  durable  than  those  of  Houses,  for  the 
same  reason  proportionally.  But  bodies  of  men  are  more 
remote  from  those  fixed  stars  than  Houses  themselves,  and 
so  more  corruptible  :  and  for  that  cause  their  Significations 
apply  less  to  them,  or  if  they  happen,  abide  but  little ;  the 
Significations  of  the  fixed  Stars  being  so  great  and  noble, 
so  high  and  free  from  corruption  and  mutability,  that  they 
cannot  easily  take  upon  them  a  variable  commixture  with 
things  quickly  corruptible  and  suddenly  changeable,  unless 
it  be  as  oil  on  water ;  for  though  it  may  enter  into  it,  yet 
such  impression  will  not  long  continue  ;  for  the  fixed  Liglits 
operate  with  so  much  nobleness,  that  by  reason  of  their 
long  distance  from  those  vile  corruptible  changeable  bodies, 
and  neighbourhood  to  the  Supreme  Light,  their  effects 
cannot  remain  in  or  with  them,  when  they  are  lightly  or 
suddenly  changed  and  corrupted;  especially  in  base  people 
and  mean  spirits  ;  for  they  seldom  transcend  his  person  to 
whom  they  happen,  and  oftentimes  leave  him  whilst  he 
lives,  and  that  to  his  damage,  so  great  that  God  alone  can 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  65 

prevent ;  as  I  affirm  for  the  most  part ;  though  'tis  possible 
they  may  sometimes  terminate  in  good  and  continue  long  : 
As  it  hath  sometimes  happened  that  some  have  lived  to  the 
greatest  years  of  the  Alcocoden,  of  whom  I  never  saw 
but  one  in  my  time,  who  was  named  Richard,  who  affirmed 
himself  to  have  been  a  Courtier  under  Charles  the  Great, 
King  of  France,  and  that  he  had  lived  500  years.    At  what 
time  there  was  a  report  of  one  that  had  continued  alive  ever 
since  our  Saviour's  days  called  "  Johan  Buttadeus  "  because 
he  had  impulissed  the  Lord  as  he  was  led  to  be  crucified. 
Who  said  to  him,  "  Thou  shalt  expect,  or  wait  for  me,  till  I 
come."    The  aforesaid  Richard  I  saw  at  Ravenna  in  the  year 
1223,  and  the  said  John  is  said  to  have  passed  through 
riorilivium,  in  his  journey  to  St.  James's  at  Compostella, 
in  the  year  1267.    Nor  could  the  Significations  of  the  Fixed 
Stars  be  applied  ;  or.  adhere  to  men  nor  sensibly  remain  in 
them,  unless  there  were  some  Medium  by  which  they  might 
Act  upon  them  which  are  the  Planets,  which  are  secondary 
Agfents^  as  the  first  are  principal ;  for  whenever  there  are 
divers  actions  in  order,  attributed  to  several  Agents,  the 
principal  act  ought  to  be  referred  to  the  principal  Agent, 
which  in  respect  of  the  effects  on  corruptible  things,  was 
the  Primary  Cause.    And  the  Planets  as  Secondary  :  for  that 
corruption  which  those  inferiors  suflfer,  happens  by  reason  of 
their  too  great  distance  from  the  incorruptible  superiors  ; 
yet  their  eff'ects  sometimes  continue  long  in  Grandees,  and 
persons  very  rich,  who  are  apt  for  Empire,  magnanimous, 
and  of  brave  and  excellent  spirits ;  such  as  in  my  time  was 
the  Emperor  Frederick  the  Second,  who  when  he  was 
indigent  and  in  great  necessity,  was  arrived  to  the  Imperial 
Dignity,  and  brought  under  his  obedience  all  Apulia,  the 
Kingdom  of  Sicily,  Jerusalem,  Crocovia,  Italy  and  the 
whole  Roman  Empire  (except  of  Lombardy)  subduing  all 
Enemies,  Traitors  and  Rebels,  and  remained  in  that  illus- 
trious flourishing  condition ;  yet  at  last  died  miserably, 

5 


66 


THE  ASTROLOGER  S  GUIDE. 


being  poisoned  by  his  domestics,  and  all  his  family  extir- 
pated so  that  scarce  any  of  them  remained.  Such  another 
was  Ecilinus  de  Komano,  who  when  he  was  but  mean, 
was  far  exalted  above  all  other  Italians,  for  he  ruled  and, 
as  it  were,  tyrannized  over  the  Marquisate  of  Treves  even 
to  Almaine  and  Trent,  and  within  four  or  five  miles  of 
Venice,  and  his  Tyranny  continued  twenty-six  years  ;  but  at 
last  all  these  glories  were  overcast  with  calamity,  for  when 
it  seemed  impossible  to  suppress  him,  he  fell  into  the  hands 
of  his  enemies  at  a  battle  in  the  Country  of  Mediolanensi 
a  pud  Cassianum,  and  died  wretched,  and  all  his  posterity 
was  destroyed,  not  one  of  them  remaining.  In  the  same 
manner  there  was  one  in  the  Kingdom  of  Apulias  of  base 
descent,  called  Peter  de  Vinea;  who  when  he  was  a 
scholar  at  Bononia  was  forced  to  beg  for  his  living,  and 
had  not  bread  to  eat,  yet  was  made  a  notary,  and  after  that 
Protonotary  of  the  Court  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  the 
Second  ;  he  became  a  Judge  and  climed  to  such  a  grandeur, 
that  he  was  happy  that  could  obtain  the  least  of  his  favour, 
for  whatever  he  did  the  Emperor  would  confirm :  but  him- 
self would  often  set  aside  what  had  been  established  b}^  the 
Emperor,  who  made  him  Lord  of  Apulia  :  whereby  he  grew 
so  rich,  that  he  had  10,000  pounds  of  Gold  besides  other 
Treasures  almost  inestimable;  yet  in  the  end  he  fell,  and 
was  reduced  to  such  misery,  that  the  Emperor  ordered  his 
eyes  to  be  put  out ;  enraged  at  which  out  of  mere  indigna- 
tion he  struck  out  his  own  brains  against  a  wall,  as  it 
was  then  commonly  reported.  Another  was  at  Pysa 
called  Smerolus  one  of  the  dregs  of  the  vulgar,  who 
came  to  be,  as  it  is  said.  Lord  of  that  Province  :  nor  durst 
any  of  the  nobility  for  a  while  contend  with  him ;  yet  at 
last  he  came  to  nothing.  After  whom  one  Oddo 
Gualduzius,  a  mean  fellow,,  tapered  up  so  high  that  he  did 
as  it  were,  sway  the  whole  City  and  none  would  contradict 
him,  till  Galyver,  a  Judge,  caused  him  to  be  chopped  all 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS.  67 

to  pieces.  The  same  happened  at  Florylycium.  One 
called  Simon  Mustaguere  the  son  of  obscure  Parents,  who 
mounted  so  high  that  all  the  people  adored  him  :  nor  durst 
any  oppose  him,  save  only  myself,  who  knew  him  thoroughly; 
and  what  mischief  he  could,  he  did  at  his  pleasure  for  three 
years'  space  :  but  at  last  down  he  came  being  banished  the 
City  which  happened  for  the  odiousness  of  his  person  and 
cowardice.  Another  being  a  Friar  of  the  Preaching  Order, 
by  name  John  by  Nation  Vicentinus,  was  admired  as 
a  Saint  by  all  the  Italians  that  acknowledged  the  Koman 
Church  ;  but  I  ever  thought  him  an  Hypocrite :  he  grew  so 
high  that  he  was  reported  to  have  raised  18  from  the  Dead, 
(though  never  one  of  them  could  be  seen)  and  to  cure  all 
diseases,  fright  Devils,  etc.,  yet  could  I  not  perceive  any- 
body freed  by  him,  though  I  made  much  enquiry  into  his 
Miracles ;  however  the  whole  world  seemed  to  run  after 
him,  and  he  thought  himself  happy  that  could  get  a  thread  of 
his  Cap,  which  they  esteemed  equal  with  the  relics  of  the 
Saints ;  and  in  his  preaching  he  would  publicly  boast,  that 
he  had  Converse  with  Jesus  Christ,  the  Virgin  Mary,  and 
Angels  when  he  list.  By  which  tricks,  the  Friars  of  his 
order  at  Bononia  got  more  than  20,000  marks.  And  his 
power  was  so  great  that  by  his  own  will  he  released 
a  Soldier  as  he  was  going  to  Execution  for  murder,  Nor 
durst  the  Magistrates  deny  him,  nor  any  speak  ill  of  him  but 
myself,  who  knew  all  his  wheadles  and  cozenages :  for 
which  the  rabble,  merely  out  of  fear  of  him,  reported  me  an 
Heretic.  In  which  esteem  and  pomp  he  continued  above  a 
year,  but  at  last  went  out  like  the  snuff  of  a  candle,  with  a 
stink,  his  devices  and  hypocrisie  being  discovered,  so  that 
he  became  as  generally  :  and  everybody  was  ashamed  to  be 
seen  in  his  company. 

142.  The  142nd  Consideration  is,  to  observe  in  Nativities 
and  general  questions,  the  gifts  and  good  advantages  be- 
stowed on  men  by  the  Planets ;  because  those  are  applied 

5—2 


68 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


more  easily  to  them,  and  continue  longer  extended  to  their 
successors,  according  as  they  are  well  disposed  in  the  Radices 
of  their  Nativities;  but  they  are  seldom  exceeding  great, 
unless  when  applied  by  fortunate  fixed  stars  ;  because  being 
of  a  more  swift  mutability  they  have  a  closer  afiinity  with 
them,  especially  if  proceeding  from  the  inferior  Planets ;  for 
their  conformity  withmen^  their  correlative  subjects.  Those 
of  the  Superiors  last  not  so  long  with  men  but  in  building 
of  houses  they  are  much  better  than  the  other. 

Note  by  Lilly. — Of  the  Good  given  by  ^  and  other  Planets. 
— Saturn  Oriental  and  well  disposed,  that  is  strong  and  in 
Reception,  gives  great  fortune  in  building,  planting  trees 
requiring  a  long  growth^  in  manuring  ground,  erecting  water- 
works and  the  like.  J upiter  gives  good  luck  in  Sciences 
such  as  the  Law  ;  and  in  Dignities,  being  made  a  Bishop,  a 
Judge,  or  the  like.  Mars  in  leading  forth  of  Armies,  etc. 
Sol  in  Lay  Preferments,  as  Kingdoms,  Governments,  etc. 

But  the  lower  Planets  bestow  their  gifts  inherent  to  men 
and  more  durable :  as  Venus,  in  the  attempts  of  women, 
their  ornaments,  courting  them,  etc.  Mercury  in  trading, 
writing,  etc.  The  Moon  in  navigation^  planting  vines, 
using  drinks,  selling  wine,  etc.  All  these,  I  say  are 
excellently  well  bestowed  by  the  Planets  advantageously 
posited,  and  endure  longer,  that  is  to  say,  The  prosperities 
given  by  the  Moon  may  continue  to  the  seventh  year  or 
generation,  because  she  is  the  seventh  Planet  reckoning 
downwards  ;  and  if  they  pass  the  seventh  age  or  generation 
they  cannot  exceed  the  eighth  as  suppose  from  the  42nd 
year  to  the  45th  year  including  both  those  of  Mercury  may 
endure  to  the  sixth  age,  being  the  sixth  from  Saturn,  but 
will  scarce  hold  out  the  seventh.  Those  of  Yenus  to  the 
fifth  age_,  she  being  the  fifth  Planet  from  Saturn :  but  will 
not  exceed  the  sixth.  Those  of  the  Sun  to  the  fourth  age. 
Those  of  Mars  to  the  third  age.    Those  of  Jupiter  to  the 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


61> 


second  age.  Those  of  Saturn  only  for  one  age,  and  cannot 
transcend  ;  nay  seldom  reach  the  third.  And  though  I  say 
they  may  continue  so  long,  yet  do  I  not  say  that  they  shall 
not  be  finished  before,  for  as  Aristotle  says,  There  are  terms 
that  cannot  be  passed  over :  yet  he  does  not  say  but  that 
they  may  be  prevented  and  come  short  off :  so  in  these 
cases ;  and  further,  when  I  say  that  they  cannot  continue 
longer,  I  mean  without  vanishing  wholly,  or  so  depressed, 
that  it  will  be  no  more  like  what  was  before,  than  green  or 
russet  to  a  perfect  white  unless  by  chance  something  from 
another  cause  happens  anew;  which  seldom  chances,  nor 
can  truly  be  said  to  be  the  same,  but  quite  another  thing 
from  the  first.  Hence  comes  perhaps  the  common  observa- 
tion ;  that  goods  or  possessions  ill  got,  never  abide  to  the 
fifth  or  third  age  :  many  that  use  that  proverb  not  knowing 
whence  it  comes  to  pass  but  only  because  they  have  heard 
others  say  so  or  seen  it  often  happen  thus.  But  from  what 
we  have  here  laid  down,  some  reason  may  be  given ;  for  ill 
gotten  goods  count  such  as  are  got  by  way  of  usury,  lies, 
deceit,  theft,  rapine,  and  the  like. 

143.  The  143rd  Consideration,  Is  to  understand  the  true 
method  of  judging,  and  by  what  ways  thou  may  est  come  to 
some  result,  that  thou  mayst  examine  and  rightfully  discuss 
the  same,  and  discover  the  truth  of  what  the  stars  shall 
show  thee  ?  And  herein  there  are  14  points  to  be  considered 
and  heeded : 

1.  Whether  the  Querent  proposes  the  question  really  and 
intentively  or  not  ?  For  if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant 
and  Lord  of  the  hour  be  the  same  or  the  Signs  wherein 
those  Significators  are  placed  be  of  the  same  Triplicity  or 
complection  the  Question  is  serious ;  but  otherwise,  if  the 
Ascendant  shall  be  the  end  of  any  Sign,  the  Question  is  not 
Radical. 

2.  Behold  the  Ascendant  and  his  Lord,  the  Moon  and  the 
Planet  from  which  she  separates  and  assign  them  for 


70 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


Significators  of  the  Querent ;  the  Seventh  and  the  Planet 
with  which  the  Moon  is  joined,  shall  represent  the  person 
enquired  after ;  but  if  it  be  necessary,  descend  to  the  persons, 
as  the  things  are  signified  by  the  Houses,  from  the  first  to 
the  twelfth. 

3.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  thing  enquired  about,  the 
House  and  sign  whereby  it  is  signified. 

4.  The  Aspects  of  the  Planets  both  good  and  malevolent  to 
the  Significators  of  the  things  sought  after. 

5.  In  what  place  from  its  own  House  each  of  the  Signifi- 
cators are ;  viz.,  Whether  in  his  own  or  the  second,  third,  or 
fourth,  etc.,  or  in  the  Combust  way  or  the  like  places. 

6.  Whether  they  are  found  in  Angles  Cadent  or  Succedent 
Houses. 

7.  Diligently  see  where  the  Querent's  Assistants  must 
come,  viz.,  whether  from  a  Father,  a  Son,  a  King,  a  Kinsman, 
or  a  Friend,  etc. 

8.  By  the  mirth  of  the  Querent,  as  if  the  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  shall  be  in  the  fifth,  or  elsewhere  joined  with  its 
Lord ;  free  from  being  afflicted  by  the  Infortunes.  Or  by 
sadness ;  as  if  his  Significator  happen  in  the  6th,  7th,  8th,  or 
12th ;  unless  the  question  be  of  things  signified  by  those 
Houses  :  and  as  thou  findest  so  judge. 

9.  By  the  Fortunes  and  Infortunes,  according  as  thou 
findest  them  in  places  signified,  the  things  about  which  the 
Querent  is  moved;  and  if  the  benevolents  are  more,  'tis 
good,  if  otherwise  the  contrary ;  if  the  testimonies  are  equal, 
then  indifferent. 

10.  Whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  in  the  House 
of  the  thing  enquired  after,  or  with  its  Lord. 

11.  In  what  House  the  Lord  of  the  first  is  joined  with  the 
Significator  of  the  things  looked  after ;  for  by  the  Significator 
of  that  House,  or  his  occasion,  thou  mayst  judge  the  matter 
will  be  brought  about. 

12.  If  the  Significators  are  not  joined  there,  whether  there 


THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  EONATUS. 


71 


be  any  translation  of  light  between  them  by  any  Planet,  or 
receives  their  description,  thou  shalt  judge  the  same  thing. 

13.  By  the  natures  of  the  Significators  themselves, 
agreeing  in  their  natures  and  significations  with  each  other. 

14.  According  as  the  receiver  of  the  Significators'  virtue  or 
disposition  shall  be  a  Fortune  or  Infortune  strong  or  weak, 
and  does  behold  the  Significator,  or  the  Moon,  or  any  with 
aspect  of  love  or  enmity,  so  shalt  thou  pronounce  judgement. 

144.  The  144th  Consideration  is^  To  observe  in  Questions 
Nativities,  or  Elections,  when  the  Significators  shall  not 
clearly  show  thee  what  thou  wouldst  know  but  the  signifi- 
cation remains  dubious,  so  that  the  mind  is  in  suspense,  take 
the  place  of  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  and  the  place  of  the 
Lord  of  the  House  of  the  Moon,  and  see  the  distance  of 
degrees  between  them,  beginning  from  Aries,  of  which  make 
signs,  and  add  the  degree  of  the  sign  ascending ;  and  pro- 
ject from  the  Ascendant  as  well  by  day  as  night,  and  where 
the  number  falls,  the  Lord  of  that  House  shall  be  Significator 
and  from  him  take  the  signification  of  the  business  enquired, 
for  according  to  his  disposition  thou  mayest  judge. 

145.  The  145th  Consideration  is,  That  thou  see  in  Diurnal 
Nativities,  whether  CorLeonis*  be  in  the  Ascendant,  that  is  to 
say  in  the  Oriental  Line  or  above  it  one  degree  or  below  it  three 
degrees;  or  whether  it  be  in  the  tenth  in  like  degrees,  without 
the  Conjunction  or  Aspect  of  any  of  the  Fortunes;  for  this 
alone  signifies  that  the  Native  shall  be  a  person  of  great 
note  and  power,  too  much  exalted,  and  attain  to  high  pre- 
ferment and  honours,  although  descended  from  the  meanest 
parents.    And  if  any  of  the  Fortunes  behold  that  place  also, 

*  Regulus,  (a  Leonis)  a  star  of  the  1st  magnitude  in  28  degrees 
9  minutes  of  Leo  of  the  nature  of  Mars  ;  it  is  said  to  give  glory,  wealth 
and  great  honours,  chiefly  by  military  preferment  ;  but  the  glory 
promised  by  such  stars  as  Aldebaran,  Hercules,i  Bellatrix,  Antares, 
etc.,  and  all  which  are  of  the  nature  of  Mars  —  is  said  to  be 
transient. 


72 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


his  glory  shall  be  the  more  increased ;  but  if  the  Nativity 
be  nocturnal,  his  fortune  will  be  somewhat  meaner,  but  not 
much  ;  but  if  the  Infortunes  cast  their  aspects  there  it  will 
still  be  more  mean ;  but  if  the  Fortunes  behold  it  also  they 
will  augment  the  good  promised  a  fourth  part,  and  mitigate 
the  evil  as  much  ;  yet  still  whatever  of  all  this  happens,  it 
signifies  that  the  Native  shall  die  an  unhappy  death ;  or  at 
least  that  all  his  honours,  greatness,  and  power,  shall  at  last 
suffer  an  eclipse,  and  set  in  a  cloud. 

146.  The  146th  Consideration  is,  That  thou  take  the 
place  of  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  and  the  place  of  the 
Lord  of  the  12th,  and  subtracting  the  lesser  from  the 
greater  add  to  the  remainder  the  degrees  of  the  sign  ascend- 
ing, and  project  from  the  Ascendant;  and  where  the  number 
falls  the  Lord  of  that  sign  shall  be  partner  with  the  Lord  of 
the  Question,  and  shall  be  called  the  Principal  Partner. 
Again,  take  the  place  of  the  Lord  of  the  said  sign,  and  the 
place  of  the  Lord  of  the  Part  of  Fortune,  and  subtracting 
the  lesser  from  the  greater  add  the  degrees  of  that  sign 
ascending  ;  and  where  the  number  falls,  the  Lord  of  the  sign 
shall  be  another  Partner,  and  be  called  the  Secondary 
Partner ;  which  if  it  happen  to  be  the  same  Planet,  regard 
only  that;  but  if  different,  then  take  both  and  subtract 
the  lesser  from  the  greater  and  add  the  degrees  of  the  sign 
ascending,  and  tlie  Planet  on  whose  House  the  number 
falls  shall  be  the  third  Partner  :  and  which  of  those  three  is 
the  strongest  shall  be  the  chiefest  sharer  in  the  significations 
of  the  thing  enquired  after.  If  all  the  remainders,  or  two  of 
them,  shall  happen  on  the  House  of  one  Planet ;  that  shall 
be  preferred.  If  the  Question  seem  good,  and  those  Partners 
are  ill  disposed,  they  will  diminish  of  the  good  signified  by 
the  Question,  and  so  on  the  contrary ;  but  if  the  Question 
seem  evil,  and  they  are  well  disposed,  they  will  allay  and 
mitigate  the  evil  signified  by  the  Question,  and  so  likewise 
on  the  contrary. 

END  OF  THE  CONSIDERATIONS  OF  GUIDO  BONATUS. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS 

FROM  THE 

SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OE  CAEDAK 


GENERAL  APHORISMS. 

1.  Life  is  short,  Art  long,  Experience  not  easily  obtained, 
Judgement  difficult,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary,  that  a 
Student  not  only  exercise  himself  in  considering  several 
Figures,  but  also  that  he  diligently  read  the  writings  of 
others  who  have  treated  rationally  of  this  Science,  and 
make  it  his  business  to  find  out  the  true  natural  causes  of 
things  by  experiments,  to  know  the  certain  places  and  pro- 
cessions of  the  Planets  and  Fixed  Stars,  Constellations,  etc., 
but  above  all  to  be  a  passionate  lover  of  truth. 

2.  The  Principles  of  Art  are  three.  Reason,  Sense,  and 
Experience,  but  the  Principles  of  Operations  four,  viz. :  The 
Planets,  The  Parts  of  tieaven,  The  Fixed  Stars,  and  the 
Site  or  Position  ^  of  all  those  in  respect  of  one  another. 

3.  There  are  some  things  perfectly  known,  as  the  Circle 
of  Ascension,  some  in  a  competent  measure,  as  the  Revolu- 
tion of  the  Sun ;  some  may  be  known  although  they  yet 
are  not,  as  the  Revolution  of  the  Superiors  ;  some  things  fall 
under  knowledge,  yet  cannot  be  exactly  known,  as  the 
precise  Ingress  of  the  Sun  into  the  Equinoctial  Point;  some 
are  neither  known,  nor  can  be  known,  as  the  complete  com- 
mixtures and  distinct  virtues  of  all  the  Stars.f 

*  I.e.,  Aspects  and  Configurations. 

t  Modern  astrologers  are  now  thoroughly  acquainted  with  aU  but 
"  the  complete  commixtures  and  distinct  virtues  or  powers  of  all  the 
stars."  Herschell  and  Neptune  being  unknown  to  the  Ancients,  were 
not  considered  by  them,  and  at  the  present  time  therefore,  owing  to 
the  science  having  lain,  for  many  years,  dormant,  so  to  speak,  the 
influences  of  these  two  planets  are  not  yet  thoroughly  understood.  It 


74 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


4.  It  is  much  worse  for  an  Artist  to  conceive  he  knows 
those  things  which  he  is  ignorant  of  ;  than  to  be  ignorant 
of  those  things  which  he  ought  to  know. 

5.  Mean  learning  with  an  excellent  judgement,  avails 
more  than  a  mean  judgement  with  the  greatest  learning, 
yet  is  judgement  very  much  assisted  and  perfected  by  learn- 
ing: but  everything  prospers  better,  and  is  far  more  easily 
perfected  that  has  nature  for  its  guide  and  favourable  stars, 
than  that  which  is  attempted  by  human  industry  though 
never  so  diligent. 

6.  He  that  has  too  great  a  conceit  of  himself  will  be  apt 
to  fall  into  many  errors  in  his  judgement ;  yet  on  the  other 
side,  he  that  is  too  diffident,  is  not  fit  for  this  Science. 

7.  He  that  would  truly  promote  Art  must  insist  as  much 
on  the  confutation  of  false  opinions  delivered  by  others,  as 
in  the  declaration  of  truth.* 

8.  An  Astrologer  is  so  far  only  true  and  honest,  as  he 
depends  in  his  conjectures  on  principles  of  natural  philo- 
sophy,-]-  and  since  those  Arts  which  are  inherent  in  their 
proper  subjects,  cannot  promise  any  certainty  concerning 
matters  to  come,  the  Astrologer  ought  never  to  pro- 
nounce anything  absolutely  or  peremptorily  of  future 
contingencies. 

9.  Truths  of  themselves  are  to  be  desired,  for  Science 
itself  is  a  certain  good,  now  the  expectation  of  future  good 
very  much  delights  us,  and  on  the  contrary,  when  future 
evils  are  foreseen,  we  may  either  avoid  them,J  mitigate 
them,  or  at  least  bear  them  more  contentedly.§ 


is  conceived  by  the  best  modern  Astrologers  that  Herschell  is  of  the 
nature  of  Saturn  and  Mars,  and  Neptune  of  the  nature  of  Venus, 
though  infinitely  milder  in  influence. 

*  Lilly  and  Partridge  made  a  point  of  acting  up  to  this  Aphorism, 
as  may  easily  be  ascertained  from  a  perusal  of  their  works. 

t  Cardan  here  means  tbat  an  Astrologer  should  base  his  judgments 
on  the  established  and  approved  rules  of  Judicial  Astrology,  and  not 
be  too  eager  to  form  principles  of  his  own  with  regard  to  judgments 
on  any  contingencies  which  may  arise  and  which  are  not  plairdy  shown 
in  the  figure  under  consideration. 

%  The  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself. — Pro- 
verbs, c.  22,  V.  3  ;  c.  28,  v.  12. 

§  "A  skilful  person  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  stars  is  enabled 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  75 

10.  Heaven  is  the  instrument  of  the  most  High  God, 
whereby  he  acts  upon,  and  governs  inferior  things. 

11.  He  that  asserts  things  that  can  never  be  proved  by 
experience  is  deceived  and  ambitious,  but  thus  it  always 
happens,  those  that  are  most  ignorant  of  Art  delight  to 
boast  of  doing  things  difficult  or  wonderful. 

12.  It  is  all  one  as  to  promoting  of  Art,  etc.,  and  the 
knowledge  thereof,  either  from  Nativities  known,  to  predict 
what  shall  happen,  or  after  accidents  have  happened,  to 
discover  the  Nativities  before  unknown  which  are  thereby 
rectified,*  but  as  to  vulgar  opinion,  the  first  way  far  exceeds 
the  last. 

13.  He  that  goes  about  to  destroy  Art,  is  far  worse  than 
he  that  is  unskilled  in  it,  for  his  mind  is  full  of  malice  and 
idleness  as  well  as  ignorance. 

14.  Men  may  be  said  almost  to  be  compelled  by  the  Stars, 
even  in  voluntary  actions,  by  means  of  their  corrupt  affec- 
tions and  ignorance. 

15.  Always  deliver  judgements  from  the  Stars  in  general 
terms,  or  if  thou  dost  otherwise  let  it  be  when  thou  hast 
very  evident  testimonies  and  in  great  and  weighty  matters. 

16.  We  ought  not  to  use  arguments  or  tedious  discourses 
in  giving  judgement,  much  less  flatteries,  but  only  to  pro- 
nounce what  is  known  by  experience  and  firm  reason. 

17.  A  main  reason  why  events  are  so  rarely  foretold  by 


to  avert  many  of  their  effects,  and  to  prepare  himself  for  those  effects 
before  they  arrive. 

"  A  sagacious  mind  improves  the  operation  of  the  heavens,  as  a 
skilful  farmer  by  cultivation  improves  nature." — Claudius  Ptolemy 
Tetrabiblos.   The  Centeloquy. 

*  This  involves  the  doctrine  of  Kectification,  i.e.^  the  method  of 
bringing  a  nativity  to  its  true  time,  as  it  is  supposed  that  the  in- 
accuracy of  a  clock  or  watch,  or  the  mistake  of  those  whose  business 
it  is  to  observe  them,  may  cause  an  error  in  the  time  of  birth  which 
requires  to  be  rectified.  Several  methods  are  recommended  for  this 
purpose,  of  which  the  oldest  probably  is  the  animondar  of  Ptolemy ; 
we  have  the  truitine  of  Hermes  ;  the  methods  of  Argol,  Morin,  Kepler, 
etc.,  etc.  Placidus  (De  Titus,  author  of  Primum  Mobile)  is  wholly 
silent  on  the  subject  of  rectification.  Not  one  of  his  thirty  nativities 
are  rectified,  although  he  seenis  very  much  to  doubt  the  correctness 
of  some  of  them.  The  safest  events  to  rectify  a  nativity  are  those  of 
accident  and  marriage.  , 


76 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


Astrologers,  is  because  the  Art  is  yet  but  imperfectly  dis- 
covered, for  hitherto  those  that  have  been  most  excellent  in 
it,  being  commonly  old  persons,  have  despaired  to  live  to 
see  the  fortunes  of  children  newly-born,  and  the  Nativities 
of  persons  grown  up,  being  uncertain,  they  scarce  thought 
them  worth  so  much  labour. 

18.  When  true  genitures  exactly  taken  in  accidents  prove 
false  or  absurd,  and  not  agreeable  to  the  things  signified, 
they  are  to  be  accounted  monstrous,*  and  are  to  be  avoided 
as  anatomists  do  monstrous  bodies  in  their  dissections ;  for 
they  overthrow  Art. 

19.  Generals  are  to  be  gathered  from  Singulars,  and 
Singulars  from  Generals,  and  an  Artist  ought  always  to 
learn  to  distinguish  between  that  which  is  by  itself,  and 
that  which  is  only  by  accident. 

20.  The  strength  and  efficacy  of  Fixed  Stars  is  to  be  con- 
sidered from  their  magnitude,  their  splendours,  their  natures 
or  properties,  their  nearness  to  the  Ecliptic,  their  place  in  the 
World,  their  multitude,  their  first  oriental  appearance,  the 
purity  of  their  place,  the  similitude  or  agreement  of  the  body 
or  rays  of  a  Planet  with  them  and  their  circle  of  position. 

21.  The  Light  of  the  time  is  the  Sun  in  the  day,  and 
morning  twilight;  and  the  Moon  in  the  night  when  she  is 
above  the  Earth,  and  in  her  morning  rising :  so  that  some- 
times there  may  be  two  lights  of  the  time,  sometimes  it  so 
happens  that  there  is  none. 

22.  When  a  Planet  is  within  five  degrees  of  the  cusp  of 
any  house,  it  shall  be  accounted  to  have  virtue  in  that 
house  though  actually  posited  behind  the  cusp  in  another 
house. 

23.  Not  only  Trines  and  Sextiles  may  be  counted  friendly 
aspects,  but  even  Squares  and  Oppositions  too,  if  there 
happen  a  Reception.f 

The  planet  Uranus,  not  known  in  Cardan's  time,  has  doubtless 
much  to  do  with  showing  monstrous  births  and  also  eccentricity  of 
manner  and  life.  His  effects  are  not  well  understood  however  by 
modern  astrologers. 

t  This  more  especially  is  the  case  with  the  Fortunes  (1/  and  $ )  in 
horary  questions. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OFjCARDAN.  77 


APHORISMS  RELATING  TO  NATIVITIES. 

1.  A  Child  is  then  said  to  be  born  when  first  it  breathes 
in  air  at  its  mouth,  when  outside  its  mother's  womb.* 

2.  Those  that  have  the  Luminaries  unfortunate  in  Angles 
will  be  apt  to  commit  suicide. 

3.  Those  that  have  Saturn  in  Opposition  to  Jupiter,  will 
never  enjoy  peace,  and  those  that  have  the  Dragon's  Tail 
with  Jupiter,  will  seldom  be  rich. 

4.  Those  that  have  Saturn  and  Mars  in  the  same  partf  of 
the  Zodiac  will  be  liable,  in  the  course  of  their  lives,  to 
many  misfortunes  ;  and  if  they  shall  both  be  in  Taurus,  and 
posited  in  the  fourth  house ;  when  the  Ascendant,  by 
direction,  comes  to  their  rays,  the  Natives  will  have  some 
severe  falls,  or  be  in  danger  by  reason  of  some  ruinous 
buildings  falling  on  them. 

5.  Fixed  Signs  give  learning;  with  the  exception  of 
Scorpio ;  Common  Signs,  manners  and  conversation,  with 
the  exception  of  Virgo,  and  Moveable  Signs ;  riches ;  with 
the  exception  of  Capricorn ;  whence  it  appears  that  those 
are  bad  nativities  that  have  all  the  Planets  in  Virgo,  Scorpio 
or  Capricorn. 

6.  If  the  Ascendant  be  one  of  those  Signs  called  Mute,"J 
and  Mercury  in  one  that  is  not  humane,  with  any  fixed 
Star  of  the  nature  of  Saturn,  the  Native  will  never  speak 
well,  but  bring  forth  his  words  with  difficult}^ 

7.  He  that  hath  the  Moon  in  Taurus§  in  the  second 
separating  from  the  Square  or  Opposition  of  Jupiter,  and 
applying  to  a  Trine  of  the  Sun  shall  obtain  very  consider- 
able riches. 

•  8.  When  the  Abscissor,  cutter  off  of  life,  or  killing 

*  Wilson  says  the  nativity  takes  place  the  instant  the  Native 
draws  breath  independently,  or  rather  that  when  the  umbilical 
cord  is  divided. — "  Dictionary  of  Astrology." 

t  I.e-i  in  the  same  sign.  Cardan  probably  meant  Saturn  and  Mars 
in  Conjunction. 

%  The  signs  Cancer,  Scorpio,  and  Pisces,  were  termed  Mute  by  the 
Arabians. 

§  The  Moon  is  exalted  in  3°  Taurus. 


78 


THE  ASTROLOGER  S  GUIDE. 


Planet,*  is  on  the  Ecliptic,  and  an  Infortune  in  an  Angle, 
the  Native  will  die  a  violent  death. 

9.  When  an  Infortune  is  posited  on  the  cusp  of  the  seventh 
house,  the  Native  will  be  liable  to  great  calamities,t  and  if 
an  Infortune  be  in  Aspect  with  the  Sun  or  Moon  afflicted  in 
the  same  place,  the  Native^  though  a  Prince,  shall  suffer  a 
world  of  troubles. 

10.  Aries  ascending,  signifies  the  Natives  to  be  hand- 
some, and  of  a  grave  composed  temper,  but  Scorpio  on  the 
horoscope,  notes  them  to  be  great  liars. 

11.  When  the  Moon  is  in  Scorpio  in  Square  of  Saturn  in 
Leo,  or  in  Opposition  to  him  when  he  is  partially  in 
Taurus,  the  Native  rarely  has  either  wife  or  children.  If 
Saturn  be  in  Aquarius,  he  will  be  a  mere  woman-hater. 

12.  If  the  Dragon's  Tail  be  with  Saturn  in  Square  of  the 
Moon,  and  she  Cadent,  the  Native  will  be  consumptive, 
especially  if  from  an  Angle  ;  but  if  besides  it  be  in  Square 
to  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  he  will  be  sickly  and  infirm  all 
the  days  of  his  life,  and  if  such  Aspect  happen  in  or  from 
the  sixth  house,  so  much  the  worse,  j 

13.  When  Jupiter  is  in  the  Sixth  house.  Retrograde,  and 
the  Lord  of  the  Second  Peregrine,  and  no  benevolent  fixed 
star  to  help,  the  Native  will  be  very  poor  and  necessitous. 

14.  He  that  has  Mars  in  his  Ascendant  shall  be  exposed 
to  many  dangers,  and  commonly  receives,  at  some  time,  a 
great  scar  or  cut,  on  his  face. 

15.  Mercury  mixing  his  beams  with  Mars,  is  a  great 
argument  of  a  violent  death. 

16.  If  Jupiter  and  the  Moon  in  any  nativity  shall  be  very 
weak  and  afflicted  though  other  positions  seem  never  so 
promising,  yet  the  Native  shall  be  exceedingly  unhappy. 

17.  When  Yenus  is  with  Saturn  and  beholds  the  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant,  the  Native  is  inclined  to  Sodomy,  or  at 
least  shall  love  old  hard  favoured  women,  or  poor  dirty 
wenches. 

18.  When  Venus  and  Jupiter  shall  be  in  the  Seventh, 

*  Termed  also  the  Anareta. 
t  He  will  seldom  be  fortunate  in  his  married  life. 
X  These  evil  effects  would  be  much  modified  should  there  be  a 
Trine  or  Sextile  of  Jupiter  to  the  Hyleg  or  Ascendant  in  such  a  figure. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  79 

the  Moon  beholding  them  in  her  own  dignities,  and  the 
Dragon's  Head  joined  with  them  or  with  Mercury,  the 
Native  shall  get  a  great  Estate  by  means  of  his  wives. 

19.  The  Moon  full  of  light  in  Conjunction  with  Mars, 
makes  the  Native  to  be  counted  a  fool ;  but  if  she  be  void 
of  light  and  with  Saturn,  he  is  so  indeed. 

20.  Yenus  in  the  heart  of  the  Sun  gives  vast  honours 
and  dignities,  the  same  may  be  hoped  for,  if  a  Planet*  with 
the  Fixed  Star  called  "  Cor  Leonis,"  behold  the  Moon. 

21.  The  Moon  in  the  Seventh  house  renders  Natives 
subject  to  the  Falling-sickness,  and  sometimes  when  she  is 
in  the  Ascendant,  but  generally  she  makes  them  fools  if  she 
be  afflicted.-f- 

22.  Bastards  and  supposititious  children  have  frequently 
the  Ascendant  in  aspect  with  the  Moon,  and  not  the 
significator  of  the  Father ;  and  for  the  most  part  attended 
with  indications  of  some  great  misfortunes,  and  either  there 
is  no  agreement  between  the  Lord  of  the  fourth,  the  Lord  of 
the  second  and  the  Moon,  or  else  Venus  is  joined  with  Mars 
or  Mercury. 

23.  When  Jupiter  shall  be  in  the  tenth  in  Trine  of  Mars, 
and  strong  ;  and  the  Sun  with  the  Dragon's  Head,  and  the 
Moon  with  Cor  Leonis ;  such  Native,  though  the  son  of 
the  meanest  peasant,  shall  be  wonderfully  exalted. 

24.  When  any  Planet  shall  be  partly  on  the  cusp  of  the 
Seventh  in  his  own  house,  the  Native's  death  will  be  of  the 
nature  of  that  Planet  and  Place. 

25.  The  Infortunes  in  Angles  denote  a  public  death,  or  a 
sudden  one ;  the  Sun  there,  afflicted,  it  shall  be  by  some 
weapon,  or  burning,  the  Moon,  by  hanging,  or  drowning, 
according  to  circumstances. 

26.  Sol  and  Mars  peregrine  or  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  the 
Second,  signifies  that  the  Native  shall  squander  away  his 
substance  or  Estate  foolishly. 

27.  When  the  Moon  in  Opposition  to  the  Sun  is  joined 
with  nebulous  stars,  the  Native  will  have  some  defect  in  his 

*  Cardan  evidently  means  a  Fortune,  though  he  writes  "a 
planet." 

t  The  Moon  governs  the  age  of  childhood  and  her  effects  are 
powerful  on  the  weak-minded,  hence  the  term  "  Lunatic." 


80 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


sight;  if  the  Moon  in  the  Seventh  be  afflicted  by  both  the 
Infortunes,  and  if  their  rays  are  very  strong  he  will  be 
blind. 

28.  The  compound  rays  of  Jove,  Venus,  Mercur}^,  and  the 
Moon,  give  the  greatest  grace  and  sweetness  of  speech,  and 
therefore  when  Jupiter  shall  be  in  Virgo,  and  the  Moon  in 
Pisces,  it  is  an  opportune  time  for  the  birth  of  a  Poet. 
Poets  are  always  born,  not  made. 

29.  That  person  will  scarce  make  a  prosperous  end,  or 
persevere  long  in  any  eminent  degree,  who  has  not  some  of 
his  Ancestors'  Genitures  to  sympathise  with,  and  assist  his 
own. 

30.  The  fifth  sign  from  the  Ascendant  signifies  the 
Native's  children,  because  it  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
sign  on  the  Ascendant,  and  if  two  signs  shall  be  in  the 
Ascendant,  the  children  will  be  of  humours  and  manners 
exceedingly  different,  the  one  from  the  other ;  for  the  same 
reason  the  ninth  house,  signifies  grand-children. 

31.  The  Moon  with  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  a  Nativity  gives 
suspicion  of  the  mother's  honesty,  and  hints  that  the  child 
is  none  of  the  reputed  father's  begetting  ;  however,  it  will 
prove  ill-mannered,  and  for  the  most  part  unfortunate. 

32.  Whoever  has  Jupiter  in  aspect  with  the  Sun,*  will 
be  proud  and  haughty,  and  yet  shall  have  little  cause  for 
it,  unless  they  happen  to  be  in  reception. 

83.  The  Nativities  of  women  in  matters  appertaining  to 
life,  are  like  those  of  men,  but  as  to  fortune,  wholly  unlike, 
and  touching  manners,  after  a  middle  kind,  neither  wholly 
agreeable,  nor  wholly  contrary. 

34,  A  woman  that  has  Mars  with  the  Moon  is  right ;  I'll 
warrant  her. 

35.  In  complete  Nativities  the  Moon  returns  to  the  sign 
ascending  at  conception,  or  its  opposite,  or  to  the  body 
or  aspect  of  some  Planet  with  whom  she  was  at  the 
conception,  or  to  her  own  sign,  and  generally  the  Ascendant 
at  birth  is  the  Moon's  place  at  conception,  or  its  opposite, 
or  the  place  of  the  Lord  of  the  New-Moon  foregoing  the 
conception,  yet  there  are  sober  genitures  too,  when  the  Sun 
comes  to  the  place  of  the  Ascendant  or  its  Lord,  etc. 

*  More  especially  in  Square,  Opposition  or  other  evil  aspect. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  81 


36.  When  Mars  or  tlie  Moon  shall  be  with  the  Dragon's 
Head  or  Tail  in  the  twelfth,  and  Sol  and  Jupiter  in  the 
fourth  house,  the  Native  will  be  hunch -backed. 

37.  When  Mars  is  Lord  of  a  Woman's  Ascendant,  and 
Venus  posited  in  it,  or  Venus  is  Lady  of  it,  and  Mars  in  it, 
or  Mars  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  in  the  mid-heaven ;  it  is 
more  than  probable  she  will  Cuckold  her  husband.* 

38.  The  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  in  the  combust  way, 
shows  that  the  Native  will  be  much  entangled  and  pestered 
with  business. 

39.  If  Infortunes  be  in  the  tenth  house,  peregrine,  and 
not  friendly  to  the  Ascendant,  the  Native  will  be  always 
full  of  suspicions  and  jealousies. 

40.  All  Planets  above  the  Earth,  make  a  man  illustrious 
and  generally  known  far  and  near,  and  being  all  swift  in 
motion,  render  him  dexterous  and  nimble  in  the  dispatch  of 
affairs.f 

41.  Those  that  have  the  Moon,  Lady  of  the  Ascendant 
under  the  Earth,  with  the  "  Tail  of  the  Lion  "J  and  the 
<(  Virgin's  Head,"§  the  Sun  in  the  sixth,  and  Saturn  or 
Mars  in  their  own  dignities  in  the  Angles  of  the  seventh, 
will  always  be  very  infirm  and  weak. 

42.  Mercury  in  Pisces  lays  an  impediment  on  the  tongue, 
making  a  man  absurd  in  his  speech  and  uttering  unawares 
what  he  does  not  conceive  in  his  mind ;  so  if  that  sign 
ascend. 

43.  Whoever  is  born  on  the  day  of  the  Vernal  Equinox 
at  noon^  shall  by  that  testimony  alone,  become  great  in  the 
world. 

44.  Women  that  have  their  Ascendant,   Moon,  Mars, 

*  Mars  conjoined  with  Venus  or  in  square  or  opposition  thereto,  is 
considered  significantly  evil  in  a  female  geniture,  unless  there  are 
excellent  configurations  and  positions  of  the  fortunes  and  luminaries 
to  mitigate  the  evils  foreshadowed. 

t  Many  planets  in  fixed  signs  are  also  said  to  produce  fame. 

X  Deneb  (Cauda  Leonis),  a  fixed  star  of  the  second  magnitude  in 
19  degrees  53  minutes  of  Virgo,  of  the  nature  of  Saturn  and  Venus. 
Its  effect  is  unfortunate  and  said  to  make  one  publicly  disgraceful. 

§  Vindemiatrix,  a  fixed  star  of  the  3rd  magnitude  in  8  degrees 
24  minutes  of  Virgo,  of  the  nature  of  Saturn,  Venus  and  Mercury, 
It  is  mischievous  and  unfortunate  in  effect. 

6 


82 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


Venus,  and  Mercury  in  double-bodied  signs,  have  generally 
very  evil  qualities. 

45.  Jupiter  very  potent  in  a  geniture  always  promises 
some  extraordinary  happiness,  and  if  he  be  in  the  Mid- 
heaven  near  the  cusp  in  Capricorn  he  gives  a  great  deal  of 
good  fortune  by  means  of  violence  and  power  under  pretence 
of  justice,  but  the  same  will  have  an  unfortunate  issue. 

46.  Famous  are  those  persons  in  whose  Nativities  the 
Moon  receives  the  light  of  many  Planets,  or  is  joined  to 
some  powerful  Eoyal  Fixed  Star.* 

47.  When  Sol  and  Jupiter  rule  in  the  ninth,  and  over  the 
places  of  Mercury,  the  Moon,  and  Ascendant,  and  do  behold 
each  other,  such  a  Native's  words  will  be  regarded  as 
oracles. 

48.  Jupiter  and  the  Sun  in  the  second  house,  give 
a  gallant,  noble,  free  spirit ;  but  Saturn  and  Mars,  or  Saturn 
with  Mercury  in  the  seventh,  render  men  sordily  covetous. 

49.  When  the  Lord  of  the  figure  of  a  Nativity  shall  be 
Ketrograde,  and  both  ways  Cadent;  the  Native  will  be 
a  weak,  poor-spirited,  dejected  fellow,  bringing  nothing  to 
perfection. 

50.  An  Artist  may  more  easily  and  certainly  judge  of  a 
man's  Nativity,  than  of  the  weather,  because  he  knows  the 
time  of  birth,  but  not  that  of  the  gathering  together  of 
vapours. 

51.  Sol  in  Leo  alone  raises  a  man,  at  least  scarce  ever 
suffers  him  to  want  or  beg,  and  if  the  same  sign  ascend,  it 
buoys  up  his  spirit  with  hopes,  and  makes  him  master  of 
more  than  ordinary  reason. f 

52.  If  Cancer  ascend,  and  the  Moon  be  in  Moveable  or 
Common  signs,  especially  remote  from  an  Angle,  the  Native 
is  credulous,  light,  and  inconstant. 

53.  Venus  in  the  house  or  exaltation  of  Mars  is  always  a 
sign  of  filthy  lust. 

54.  The  Moon  in  Aquarius  or  Pisces  makes  the  Native 
to  be  disliked  by  Princes,  Grandees  and  the  upper  ten, 

*  Such  as  Mirach,  Rigel,  or  Sirius. 

t  A  man  born  under  this  configuration  is  generally  difficult  to 
overcome  either  with  words  or  by  force. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  83 

55.  When  the  Lord  of  the  Mid-heaven  separates  by 
Eetrogradation  from  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant,  the  Prince, 
King,  or  Ruler,  shall  be  averse  to  the  Native,  but  if  on  the 
other  side  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  being  Retrograde 
forsakes  the  Lord  of  the  tenth,  then  the  Native  shall  hate 
his  Prince^  King,  or  Governors  ;  the  like  is  to  be  understood 
of  other  houses  according  to  their  respective  significations. 

56.  A  Native  of  a  City  having  the  same  sign  and  degree 
ascending  with  that  City,  shall  in  that  place,  b}^  that  alone 
grow  great  and  eminent. 

57.  When  the  Lord  of  the  second  applies  to  the  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant;  especially  if  that  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be 
Jupiter;  the  Native  shall,  all  his  life  time^  be  happy  in 
acquiring  riches  even  to  admiration. 

58.  When  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  beholds  the  Sun 
with  a  friendly  aspect  or  is  Oriental  next  to  the  Sun, 
or  joined  with  the  Lord  of  the  tenth,  the  Native  will 
be  much  beloved  by  Kings  and  great  people  ;  for  the  cause 
of  which  favour  consider  the  nature  of  the  said  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  and  his  place. 

59.  When  several  children  have  the  same  accidents  and 
fortune,  if  it  be  in  their  childhood,  it  may  be  shown  by  the 
genitures  of  their  parents  ;  or  if  in  their  old  age,  we  may 
conclude  the  Nativities  of  their  Parents  were  so  powerful 
that  they  assimilate  their  Nativities  between  themselves 
and  suit  them  to  the  disposition  of  Children  in  the  Paternal 
Figure.* 

60.  Mars  in  moveable  Signs  makes  people  hasty  and 
choleric,  but  nowhere  more  than  in  Cancer,  nor  less  than  in 
Virgo,  but  in  the  former  he  generally  makes  the  tongue  more 
foolish  and  impertinent. 

61.  Saturn  in  the  Twelfth  threatens  the  gout;  in  the 
Sixth  some  lasting  disease  or  tedious  imprisonments. 

62.  If  the  Moon  be  betv/een  Mars  and  Sol  or  with  them, 
the  Native  will  almost  exchange  his  cradle  for  a  grave,  being 
very  short-lived. 

63.  If  the  Moon  separates  from  an  Infortune,  the  Native 

*  It  is  marvellous _  to  note  the  sympathies  which  nearly  always 
exist  between  the  nativities  of  parents  and  children. 

6—2 


64  »        THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 

will  suffer  many  diseases  in  nursing,  and  afflictions  after- 
wards. 

64.  Whoever  has  Yeniis  not  well  posited  ;  within  the  rays 
of  Mars,  unfortunate,  will  assuredly  suffer  a  world  of  mis- 
chief and  troubles  by  means  of  love.* 

65.  Watery  Signs;  but  especially,  and  above  all  others, 
Scorpio,  make  traitors ;  and  therefore  if  the  Moon  Lady  of 
the  Ascendant  be  in  that  viperous  sign ;  the  Native  will 
betray,  or  prove  a  traitor  to,  his  master ;  and  if  the  same 
position  happen  in  the  radix  of  a  city,  its  inhabitants  will 
be  rebellious  against  their  Princes  or  Governors. 

66.  Mars  is  seldom  joined  with  Mercury  for  good,  for  he 
makes  people  naughty  and  impudent,  yet  industrious  in 
Art,  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  best  Artists  are  too 
often  the  worst  men. 

67.  Mars  unfortunate  in  the  Ninth,  signifies  liars  and 
atheists. 

68.  He  that  has  Mercury  well  posited  but  the  Moon 
afflicted  shall  understand  well,  but  deliberate  ill,  and  there- 
fore such,  though  they  may  advise  others  excellently,  yet 
shall  manage  their  own  affairs  foolishly. 

69.  When  Yenus  shall  be  too  powerful  f  in  a  geniture, 
and  in  places  of  the  Infortunes,  inconveniences  are  to  be 
feared  from  unlawful  loves. 

70.  When  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  and  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  shall  be  all  in  double-bodied  Signs,  the  Native 
will  be  naturally  addicted  to  old  opinions  and  curious 
religious  notions. 

71.  When  Saturn  and  Mars  behold  each  other,  and  the 
Luminaries  be  posited  in  the  sixth,  eighth,  or  twelfth 
houses,  the  Native  shall  labour  under  some  incurable  disease 
and  lead  a  life  wholly  miserable. 

72.  When  the  Moon  is  in  the  Mid-heaven  in  Capricorn, 
and  Saturn  or  Mars  in  the  fourth,  the  Native  will  be 
infamous,  and  so  much  the  worse  if  Mars  be  in  Taurus,  and 
the  Moon  in  Scorpio,  for  then  many  troubles  will  attend 
him  during  his  whole  life. 

*  More  especially  will  the  native  suffer  if  the  geniture  be  that  of  a 
female. 

t  i.e.,  angular. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  85 

73.  When  Venus  is  with  Saturn  and  Mars,  and  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  place  of  the  Moon,  the  Native  shall  be  but  a 
fool,  yet  think  himself  a  Philosopher. 

74.  For  the  profession  or  Art  of  the  Native  we  must  con- 
sider the  Planet  which  being  Oriental  first  makes  its  egress 
from  under  the  Sun. beams,  and  if  with  this  there  be  another 
in  -the  Mid-heaven  that  beholds  the  Moon,  take  him  for  an 
Assistant,  but  if  there  be  no  such  Planet  coming  from  under 
the  Sun  beams  take  him  that  is  in  the  mid-heavea,  and  if 
there  be  none  therein  posited  then  the  Lord  of  it,  and  the 
places  of  Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury_,  but  when  these  happen 
to  be  many,  the  Native  will  practise  several  Arts ;  now  the 
Art  a  Native  practises  is  much  affected  by  the  series  of 
revolutions,  which  if  they  agree  with  his  Nativity,  he  will 
be  delighted  with  it ;  otherwise  he  will  do  it  against  his 
will. 

75.  A  prime  cause  of  men  leading  single  lives  is  the  com- 
bustion of  the  Moon  in  their  Nativities  with  Saturn,*  or 
eminently  afflicted  by  him,  so  in  women  if  a  Planet  be 
combust  or  the  Sun  in  Taurus  greatly  afflicted. 

*  76.  Mars  and  Mercury  evilly  disposed,  and  in  conjunction 
with  the  Moon,  signifies  Thieves  and  Robbers,  but  if  Saturn 
behold  them,  or  be  in  the  Seventh,  they  will  suffer  accord- 
ing to  their  deserts,  and  therefore  whenever  you  see  indica- 
tions of  grievous  crimes,  consider  whether  the  Infortunes 
are  strong  or  not,  and  oppress  the  Sun,  Moon,  or  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant ;  or  if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  combust, 
or  an  enemy  to  the  Moon,  for  then  undoubtedly  the  Native 
.will  suffer  for  his  villainy. 

77.  When  the  Moon  is  joined  to  Saturn  in  an  Angle,  the 
Native  though  a  grandee  will  be  reduced  to  poverty. 

78.  Let  him  that  has  Mars  in  the  second  house  beware  of 
concerning  himself  in  merchandise. 

79.  He  that  hath  a  Nativity  unfortunate  for  riches  and 
honour,  and  yet  the  Moon  in  conjunction  with  an  eminent 
propitious  fixed  star,  shall  unexpectedly  become  potent,  and 
again  fall  to  misery,  but  to  judge  of  the  greatness  of  the 
event  consider  the  state  of  the  Moon. 


*  This  causes  men  to  be  of  solitary  habits. 


86 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


80.  When  Venus  is  in  the  eleventh,  Mercury  in  the 
twelfth,  the  Sun  in  the  horoscope,  Jupiter  in  the  second, 
Saturn  in  the  sixth,  and  the  Moon  in  the  ninth,  so  many 
and  great  accidents  will  happen  to  the  Native  that  his  life 
may  justly  be  esteemed  prodigious. 

81.  Saturn,  Mars,  and  the  Dragon^s  Head  in  the  fourth, 
betoken  sudden  Death. 

82.  When  the  Moon  in  a  nocturnal  Geniture  passes  by 
her  beams  from  Mars  to  Saturn,  many  inconveniences  will 
happen  to  the  Native,  chiefly  occasioned  by  women. 

83.  Those  persons  are  like  to  prove  very  learned  in  whose 
nativities  Saturn,  Venus,  Jupiter,  and  the  Moon,  do  exactly 
behold  Mercury,  provided  that  neither  Saturn  nor  the  Moon 
be  posited  in  the  Ascendant,  and  that  there  be  no  Planet  in 
an  Angle,  for  any  Planet  strong  in  an  Angle  is  an  impediment 
to  wisdom. 

84.  When  the  Sun  peregrine  in  "  Corde  Coeli "  shall  be 
in  square  of  the  Moon  in  the  Seventh,  the  Native  will 
come  to  be  the  chief  of  his  family  or  faction,  but  shall  die 
suddenly.* 

85.  In  all  Nativities  examine  exactly  all  the  Moon's  con- 
dition in  relation  to  the  three  ways  whereby  she  is  exalted,t 
for  'tis  very  necessary. 

86.  When  Infortunes  are  in  Angles,  and  Fortunes  in 
Succedent  houses,  or  the  Moon  combust,  and  the  Lord  of  her 
place  strong  and  happy,  or  Jupiter  Cadent,  and  his  disposi- 
tion well  dignified  : — the  Native  from  a  sad  mean  condition 
and  great  misery  shall  rise  to  a  considerable  grandeur  and 
felicity,  and  so  on  the  contrary. 

87.  When  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mars  are  altogether  in 
conjunction,  'tis  a  fit  time  to  bring  Neros  and  such  cursed 
monsters  of  mankind  into  the  world  :  the  Native's  manners 
are  prodigiously  wicked. 

*  The  Luminaries  in  Square  presignify  a  violent  or  sudden  death 
unless  the  benefic  rays  of  Jupiter  interpose, 
t  The  Moon  is  exalted  or  dignified  as  follows  : 

1.  By  House  in  Cancer. 

2.  By  Exaltation  in  Taurus. 

3.  By  Triplicity  when  she  is  in  Taurus,  Virgo,  or  Capricornus. 
The  Moon  is  also  held  to  be  propitious  when  she  is  swift  in  motion 
and  increasing  in  light,  provided  other  testimonies  agree. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  87 


88.  Jupiter  elevated  and  a  little  infortunated,  destroys 
the  Native's  children,  but  preserves  his  estate : — if  he  be 
descending  and  low  and  not  unfortunate,  he  gives  children 
but  not  an  estate. 

89.  When  Saturn  does  not  threaten  a  violent  death,  yet 
if  he  be  in,  or  lord  of  the  seventh  or  eighth  houses,*  he 
signifies  the  Native  shall  die  for  grief  of  mind.f 

90.  Infortunes  peregrine  in  the  Seventh  house,  having 
dominions  in  the  Ascendant,  denote  the  deaths  of  the 
Native's  wives  or  enemies.  J 

91.  It  is  next  to  impossible  that  they  that  have  never  a 
planet  above  the  earth,  nor  in  the  Ascendant  of  their 
nativities,  should  either  live  long  or  accomplish  any  great 
matters  in  the  world. 

92.  The  number  of  a  Native's  wives  (where  only  one 
at  once  is  lawful)  is  to  be  found  out  not  only  from  the 
concourse  of  the  Planets  or  Common  signs,  but  with  that 
you  must  consider  that  fit  applications  of  the  Moon  to 
Planets  at  ripe  years, §  and  testimonies  of  the  Death  of 
Wives  do  also  concur. 

93.  When  Mars  and  Mercury  aflflict  the  Lord  of  the 
Seventh,  being  elevated  above  him,  the  Native  will  kill  his 
wife  or  his  enemy,  ||  even  though  it  be  with  poison,  especi- 
ally if  either  of  them  have  power  in  the  Ascendant. 

94.  If  in  a  woman's  nativity  Mars  shall  be  under  the  Sun- 
beams, she  will  be  apt  to  play  the  Harlot  with  her  Servants 
and  mean  fellows,1f  but  if  Venus  be  true,  then  she  will  trade 
discreetly  with  Nobles  and  gallants  of  quality. 

95.  Infortunes  afflicting  the  place  of  children,  if  they 
be  but  a  little  weak,  the  Native  may  have  children;  if 
much  debilitated,  the  children  he  has  will  die ;  if  they  be 
very  weak,  he  will  be  wholly  barren. 

o  Provided  he  be  the  Anareta. 

t  Or  of  such  diseases  as  Saturn  signifies.  Violent  chills,  etc, 
having  always  due  regard  to  his  position  and  configuration  in  the 
figure  under  consideration. 

t  Or  partners. 

§  After  the  native  shall  have  arrived  at  the  age  of  puberty. 
II  Or  his  partner. 

*([  Provided  always  there  be  no  strong  benefic  aspect  of  Jupiter 
with  the  Sun. 


88 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


96.  When  the  Lord  of  the  Geniture  is  an  Tnfortune  and 
does  not  behold  the  place  of  children,  or  being  a  Fortune 
beholds  them  with  an  Aspect  of  hatred,  the  Native  will 
never  love  his  children  as  he  ought  to  do. 

97.  When  Mercury  is  under  the  earth  he  has  greater 
efficacy  in  relation  to  giving  Arts  and  Sciences,  but  in 
respect  of  eloquence  he  is  best  when  he  is  above  the 
earth. 

98.  When  Mars  is  exactly  on  the  cusp  of  the  Mid-heaven, 
and  has  no  dominion  in  the  Ascendant,  if  the  Native  live  to 
any  considerable  age,  'tis  much  to  be  feared  that  he  will  be 
killed. 

99.  When  it  happens  that  the  Significators  of  persons  of 
quality  well  posited  in  their  own  genitures,  are  such 
as  were  unfortunate  in  the  Nativities  of  their  Parents, 
it  signifies  that  they  shall  spin  out  a  laborious  life  as  to 
riches  and  honour  to  a  considerable,  age,  and  then  by 
successive  increases,  shall  attain  to  great  Estates  and 
Eminence,  whence  'tis  evident  that  the  lives  of  no  persons 
may  be  more  unlike  to  each  other,  than  theirs  who  were 
born  at  the  same  time. 

100.  Nativities  which  can  never  be  good,  are  such  as 
have  both  the  Infortunes  in  the  same  place  joined  to  one  of 
the  Luminaries,  or  when  the  infortunes  single  are  singly 
joined  to  the  Luminaries,  or  when  the  Moon  is  under  the 
sun  beams  with  Saturn  or  Mars,  or  where  all  the  Planets  are 
in  the  third,  sixth,  eighth,  or  twelfth  houses ;  or  when  the 
Infortunes  are  in  Angles,  and  the  Luminaries  and  Fortunes 
cadent,  or  when  the  Luminaries  only  are  cadent  and  all  the 
other  Planets  Retrograde,  or  when  both  the  Luminaries, 
and  both  the  Fortunes  are  afflicted,  or  when  only  Mars 
is  above  the  earth  the  other  Planets  not  being  mutually 
joined  nor  in  Angles. 

APHORISMS  CONCERNING  REVOLUTIONS. 

1.  Revolutions  may  be  said  to  be  accomplished  five  ways, 
first,  by  the  return  of  the  Sun  to  the  same  point,  which  is 
most  valid.  Secondly,  the  return  of  the  centre  of  a 
Planet  to  the  same  place  of  the  Ecliptic,  of  which  kind  that 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  89 

of  the  Moon  first,  and  then  those  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter 
are  chief.  Thirdly,  the  return  of  the  centre  of  some  smaller 
Circle  to  the  same  place.  Fourthly,  the  return  of  a  Planet 
to  his  place  in  a  smaller  circle.  Fifthly,  the  return  of 
a  Planet  wherewith  he  was  in  the  beginning  joined  as  it  is 
the  place  of  another  Planet. 

2.  When  the  Dragon^s  Tail  in  a  Nativity  unfortunately 
beholds  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  and  in  a  Revolution  the 
Moon  shall  be  joined  therewith,  and  the  Lord  of  the  House 
of  Death  being  then  in  the  place  of  an  infortune  in  the 
Radix,  shall  likewise  behold  it,  the  Party  that  year  will 
die.* 

3.  When  the  Infortunes  are  strong  in  the  Radix,  and  the 
Moon  applies  to  a  powerful  fixed  Star  of  the  Nature  of 
Mars  in  a  Revolutjon,  the  Party  will  be  apt  to  commit 
man-slaughter  that  year,  or  be  in  danger  about  it.f 

4.  Revolutions  may  produce  effects  happening  in  the 
years  following,  either  because  one  year  is  preparative 
to  another,  Or  because  the  Nativity  decrees  what  the 
Revolution  perfects,  or  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of 
the  event  as  death,  or  of  the  causes,  as  when  the  Sun 
is  exactly  in  opposition  of  Jupiter. 

5.  When  the  Ascendant  of  a  Revolution  is  the  same  with 
that  of  the  Person's  Nativity,  something  promised  in  the 
geniture  happens,  but  much  more  certainty  if  the  Moon 
shall  be  also  in  her  place  of  the  geniture,  or  the  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  in  a  place  partially  behold  the  same  house  of  the 
Radix. 

6.  If  in  a  Revolution  the  Lord  of  the  Geniture  Retro- 
grade (if  he  be  one  of  the  Inferiors),  begins  to  be  under  the 
Sun  beams,  or  (if  he  be  one  of  the  Superiors)  if  he  be 
afflicted  by  an  Infortune,  you  may  expect  some  danger  of 
your  life  that  year. 

7.  When  Jupiter  in  a  Revolution  beholds  the  Moon  or 
Venus,  or  be  in  an  Angle  in  either  of  their  places  in  the 

*  Provided  always  primary  directions  coincide  with  the  other 
testimonies. 

t  A  violent  nature,  frequently  shown  by  the  Infortunes  when 
strong  in  a  nativity,  if  devoid  of  the  controlling  benefic  rays  of 
Jupiter,  would  be  stirred  up,  and  influenced  to  action  by  such  an 
apphcation  of  the  Moon  in  a  Revolutionary  figure. 


90 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


Radix,  it  inclines  the  Party,  if  of  fit  age  that  year,  to 
marry.* 

8.  When  in  a  Person's  Revolution  whose  only  significator 
of  life  was  debilitated  in  the  Radix,  the  Fortunes  shall  be 
combust  in  any  house  but  the  Ascendant,  and  the  Infor- 
tunes  being  above  the  Earth,  shall  behold  the  Sun 
Ascendant  and  Moon,  or  the  Moon  be  under  the  Earth,  such 
person  without  any  ill  direction  may  die  that  year.f 

9.  If  a  Geniture  be  weak  as  to  life,  and  three  Planets  be 
joined  in  a  Revolution,  there  is  imminent  danger  of  some 
eminent  disease,  especially  if  they  happen  in  the  sixth 
house. 

10.  When  at  ripe  Age  a  Revolution  shall  have  Venus  in 
Sextile  of  Mercury,  who  was  joined  to  her  in  the  Genesis 
in  the  same  place,  the  Native  will  be  strangely  haunted 
with  wanton  thoughts  and  venereal  imaginations,  and  if 
they  shall  be  in  conjunction  in  the  same  place  where  before 
they  were  in  Sextile^  he  shall  that  year  enjoy  some  mistress 
that  he  is  much  enamoured  of. 

11.  When  in  the  hour  of  a  Revolution  the  Superior 
Planets  or  others  shall  be  joined  in  the  place  of  a  Radical 
Significator,  expect  from  thence  some  notable  matter  to 
happen  of  that  kind  which  is  thereby  naturally  promised. 

12.  When  the  Moon  is  joined  with  Saturn  in  a  Revolution, 
and  he  casts  a  square  to  the  Ascendant,  such  person  shall 
that  year  suffer  in  his  body  by  reason  of  a  disease  of  his 
mind.  J 

13.  The  additions  that  are  made  by  the  procession  of  the 
sun  in  an  annual  Revolution,  transfer  the  significations 
for  near  upon  so  many  daj^s  after  the  Revolution,  as  there 
are  years  past. 

14.  When  the  Moon  agreeing  with  Saturn  in  the  Radix, 
or  being  with  any  other  Planet  in  his  dignities,  if  she 

*  And  if  marriage  is  denied  by  the  nativity  he  will  be  inclined  to 
live  with  a  mistress. 

t  This  statement  should  be  received  with  great  caution.  The 
Astrologer  should  never  judge  of  death  save  by  primary  directions 
which  correspond  with  secondary  directions  in  showing  evidence  of 
final  dissolution.  It  is  of  course  well  to  consider  the  Revolutionary 
figure  in  connection  with  the  directions. 

X  Or  vertigo. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  91 


happen  in  a  Eevolution  (after  the  age  of  forty  years)  to  be 
corporally  joined  with  Saturn  in  the  same  latitude,  or  being 
full  of  light  shall  be  in  opposition  to  him  and  in  contrary 
latitude  from  the  sixth  house  to  the  eighth,  the  Native 
will  undoubtedly  fall  into  some  strange  disease  and  die 
thereof.* 

15.  When  the  houses  of  the  Ascendant  or  Moon  in  the 
Radix  shall  be  in  square  or  opposition  to  the  Infortunes  in  a 
Revolution,  the  Native  will  suffer  much  trouble,  but  if  the 
Moon  be  in  conjunction  with  them,  then  he  shall  do  much 
mischief  to  other  people,  but  if  besides  this  the  Infortunes 
are  Lords  of  inimical  places,  He  shall  botli  do  damage  to 
others  and  suffer  much  himself. 

16.  The  particular  times  of  accidents  happening  are  to 
be  found  out  from  annual  and  monthly  revolutions  and 
transits.-f- 

17.  Fatal  will  that  year  be  to  the  Native's  health,  when 
in  the  Revolution  many  of  the  Hylegicals  come  to  bad 
places  of  the  Figure,  or  to  the  Aspects  of  the  Infortunes. 

18.  If  any  Planet  be  afflicted  in  an  annual  revolution, 
the  effects  will  appear  when  he  shall  apply  by  body,  square 
or  opposition  to  the  Planet  that  is  Lord  of  the  sign  wherein 
he  is. 

19.  Diseases  are  for  the  most  part  of  the  nature  of  the 
Lord  of  the  sixth  house,  or  the  Planet  therein  posited  as 
well  in  Revolutions  as  Nativities. 

20.  The  Revolution  of  a  year  is  one  thing  in  time,  which 
is  the  return  of  the  Sun  to  the  same  point  from  the  Equi- 
noctial ; — another  thing  in  the  World,  which  is  its  return 
to  the  same  fixed  star,  and  yet  another  thing  in  Nativities, 
which  is  its  return  to  its  former  place,  but  with  the  addition 
of  so  much  of  the  Ecliptic  as  he  passes  through  in  one 
natural  day. 

*  Provided  always  primary  directions  influence  such. 

t  The  Moon  by  her  transits  influences  the  lesser  events  of  life,  the 
greater  Luminary  and  the  planets  by  their  transits,  influence  the 
greater  events  of  life. 


92 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


APHORISMS  RELATING  TO  DECUMBITURES, 
DISEASES,  PHYSIC,  ETC. 

1.  In  sickness,  the  Ascendant  *  shall  signify  the  Patient, 
the  seventh  house  the  disease,  the  Luminaries  the  Patient's 
strength,  the  Infortunes  the  strength  of  the  disease,  bub  the 
eighth  house  has  always  a  share  in  the  signification.*)- 

2.  When  the  Moon  applies  to  Planets  of  a  nature  contrary 
to  that  of  the  distemper,  especially  if  they  be  Fortunes,  the 
disease  will  be  changed  for  the  better. 

3.  When  the  Moon  in  the  beginning  of  a  sickness  (which 
is  called  the  Decumbiture  of  the  Patient)  shall  be  either 
under  the  Sun  beams  or  with  the  Dragon's  Tail,  Saturn  or 
Mars,  it  threatens  extraordinary  danger,  and  if  the  party 
be  old,  even  her  conjunction  with  Jupiter,  Mercury,  or  Venus, 
is  not  without  peril ;  the  same  but  nothing  so  grievous  may 
be  feared  when  she  is  in  square  or  opposition  to  any.  of 
them,  but  if  besides  all  this  she  shall  happen  to  have 
been  in  their  places  in  the  Patient's  geniture,  he  will 
certainly  die. 

4.  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Venus  rule  the  blood;  Mars  and  Sol, 
choler  ;  the  Moon  and  Venus,  phlegm ;  Saturn  and  Mercury 
melancholy ;  and  Mars  and  Mercury  with  the  Sun,  black 
choler. 

5.  Saturn  causes  long  diseases;  Venus  indifferent,  Mercury 
various  ones;  the  Moon  such  as  return  after  a  certain  time, 
as  Vertigos,  Falling-sickness,  etc.J  Jupiter  and  Sol  give 
short  diseases,  but  Mars  the  most  acute  of  all. 

6.  When  you  find  the  Figure  at  the  beginning  of  a 
grievous  distemper  to  appear  much  more  mild  and  favour- 
able than  the  distemper,  you  may  conclude  the  disease 
contracts  its  malignity  from  the  Nativity,  the  principal 
places  falling  upon  some  disastrous  configurations. 

7.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  the  Lunations  preceding  the 
disease  and  thence  likewise  to  take  indications  of  the 
Patient's  condition. 

8.  If  you  find  a  Person  after  the  age  of  50  years  labour 

And  its  Lord. 

t  The  seventh  house  and  its  lord  signify  the  physician . 

X  And  all  diseases  proceeding  from  excess  of  moisture,  humour,  etc. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  93 

under  strong  and  frequent  diseases,  you  may  conclude  the 
significator  of  life  in  his  Radix  to  be  sorely  afflicted  by 
the  body  or  aspects  of  one  of  the  Infortunes. 

9.  When  the  Moon  is  in  a  fixed  sign  physic  works  the 
less,  and  if  in  Aries,  Taurus,  or  Capricorn  it  will  be  apt  to 
prove  nauseous  and  very  distasteful  to  the  Patient. 

10.  In  Purging,  'tis  best  that  both  the  Moon  and  Lord  of 
the  Ascendant  descend  and  be  under  the  Earth : — in  vomit- 
ing that  they  ascend. 

11.  Purging,  Vomiting,  Bleeding,  Making  use  of  issues, 
etc.,  ought  to  be  done  while  the  Moon  is  in  moist  signs,  the 
chief  of  which  is  Pisces,  the  next  Cancer. 

12.  The  significator  of  life  in  the  Radix  being  strong  in 
natural  diseases  helps  very  much,  but  in  casualties,  little  or 
nothing. 

13.  When  the  Moon  is  with  Venus,  Choler  is  better 
and  more  safely  expelled;  and  when  she  is  with  Jupiter, 
Melancholy. 

14.  Every  immoderate  Position  of  the  Heavens  to  Persons 
weak  and  aged,  brings  death ;  to  others  violent  accidents 
and  grievous  calamities. 

15.  If  a  disease  begin  when  the  Moon  is  in  opposition  to 
the  Sun,  'tis  by  reason  of  superfluity  of  humours ;  if  she 
suffer  an  eclipse,  the  same  time  'tis  for  weakness  of  the 
Spirits  and  Vital  power. 

16.  The  Infortunes  being  Oriental,  cause  Diseases ;  Occi- 
dental, defects. 

17.  Venus  with  Saturn  in  the  seventh  and  Mars  elevated 
above  them  both_,  causes  barrenness  in  men,  and  Abortions 
in  women. 

18.  Sagittary  and  Gemini  signify  Diseases  that  come  with 
falling,  as  Swooning,  Palling- sickness,  Suff'ocations  of  the 
womb,  etc. 

19.  When  at  the  beginning  of  a  disease  the  Luminaries 
are  both  with  the  Infortunes,  or  in  opposition  to  them,  the 
sick  will  very  hardly  escape. 

20.  From  the  Moon's  applications  to  the  Fortunes  or  good 
aspect  of  the  Sun,  the  same  being  neither  contrary  to  the 
disease,  nor  afflicted,  nor  in  the  power  of  the  Infortunes : — 


94 


THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 


health  may  be  expected,  but  by  her  going  to  the  Infortunes 
of  like  nature  with  the  disease,  or  ill  beams  of  the  Sun, 
death  is  to  be  feared. 

21.  Cold  and  dry  diseases,  such  as  are  naturall}'  long,  are 
increased  by  Saturn  ;  but  those  that  are  short,  hot  and  dry, 
from  Mars. 

22.  A  conjunction  of  the  Luminaries  in  Aries,  causes 
alteration  and  death,  if  Venus  and  Mercury  be  there  retro- 
grade ;  the  like  if  it  happen  in  Scorpio  or  Virgo  or  in  any 
humane  sign;  so  likewise  if  such  conjunction  fall  in  the 
sixth,  seventh,  or  eighth  house  of  the  figure  of  the 
Decumbiture  within  the  Aspect  of  an  Infortune_,  the 
Patient  will  be  in  great  danger. 

23.  Mars  in  the  Ascendant  at  the  Decumbiture,  makes 
the  disease,  swift,  violent,"^  afflicting  the  npper  parts  and 
disturbing  the  mind  ;  and  if  besides  this,  the  dispositors  of 
the  Luminaries  and  Ascendant  happen  to  be  afflicted,  death 
will  follow ;  the  like  if  both  the  Luminaries  be  Cadent  from 
Angles,  and  not  assisted  by  the  Fortunes ;  but  if  in  such  a 
position,  the  Fortunes  strong  shall  have  dominion  in  two 
places,  the  disease  will  be  changed  from  Acute  to  Chronic, 
and  the  Patient  at  last  will  escape  beyond  hope. 

24.  From  the  first  hour  of  the  day  (or  one  in  the 
morning  inclusive)  till  six,  blood  predominates,  whence 
morning  sleeps  become  so  sweet  and  pleasant;  from  thence 
to  noon,  Choler,  afternoon  Phlegm,  and  from  the  beginning 
of  the  Night  till  mid-night,  Melancholy. 

25.  Saturn  in  Fiery  Signs  when  the  Sun  is  weak  causes 
hectic  fevers ;  Jupiter  sanguinary  ones,  and  if  Mars  behold 
him  Putrid  ones;  Mars  in  such  signs  gives  burning  fevers  of 
all  sorts ;  Venus  ephemeral  fevers,  and  if  the  rays  of  Mars 
be  mixed,  putrid  ones  from  phlegm ;  Mercury  mixed  ones, 
but  if  the  Moon  be  joined  with  him  she  makes  pituitous 
fevers  from  the  corruption  of  the  humours ;  Saturn  mixing 
signification  with  Mars,  causes  Melancholy  fevers,  and  if 
Mars  be  under  the  Sun  in  the  sixth  or  twelfth  house  in 
fiery  Signs,  or  being  so  posited  shall  cast  his  beams  on  the 
Significator  of  life,  or  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  of  the 
Revolution,  or  if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  or  Significator 

'^^  Symptoms  of  fever  will  probably  set  in. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  95 

of  life  apply  to  his  aspects  by  direction,  it  occasions  burn- 
ing pernicious  fevers  and  like  to  venomous  ones  ;  but  if  to 
these,  Saturn  or  the  Dragon's  Head  or  Tail,  or  Venus  Com- 
bust be  added,  or  if  these  Planets  shall  be  posited  in  Scorpio 
or  Leo,  the  fever  will  be  altogether  pestilential. 

26.  Mischievous  fevers  are  caused  when  the  Sun  is 
Afflicted  in  Leo,  but  if  otherwise  he  be  fortified  they 
seldom  happen,  because  the  matter  then  corrupts  and  is 
carried  off,  unless  by  chance, 

27.  Watery  signs  threaten  Putrid  fevers  of  very  bad 
continuance  if  Mars  (especially  combust)  have  any  rule  in 
them,  but  earthly  signs  are  altogether  free  from  putrid 
fevers. 

28.  It  will  be  a  fatal  time  to  suffer  amputation  or  lose 
any  member  when  the  moon  is  in  an  oblique  sign  under  the 
Sun  beams  and  opposed  by  Mars.* 

29.  A  tedious  travail  and  delivery  in  child-birth  is  to  be 
expected,  when  the  Moon  is  aspected  by  the  Infor tunes,  and 
in  an  oblique  sign,  and  a  Planet  retrograde  or  slow  of 
Motion  is  in  the  Ascendant. 

30.  Venus  is  cold  in  the  second  degree,  and  moist  in  the 
third;  the  Moon  cold  in  the  third,  and  moist  in  the  fourth ; 
Jupiter  hot  in  the  second,  and  moist  in  the  first ;  the  Sun 
hot  in  the  third,  and  dry  in  the  second ;  Mars  dry  in  the 
third,  and  hot  in  the  fourth ;  and  Saturn  both  cold  and  dry 
in  the  fourth. 

31.  The  special  Significator  of  a  disease  is  that  unfortu- 
nate Planet  from  whom  the  Significator  separates  by  a  bad 
aspect ;  and  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  shows  the  cause  of 
the  grief  if  he  be  found  anywhere  unfortunate. 

32.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  be  an  Infortune  the 
sick  will  be  unruly,  but  if  he  be  a  Fortune  he  will  readily 
take  what  is  prescribed. 

33.  The  fifth  house  and  its  Lord,  show  the  medicines,  and 
their  nature  whether  good  or  evil,  proper  or  improper. 

34.  As  the  lie  volution  of  a  year  as  to  its  ill  significations, 
happens  according  to  the  directions  from  the  geniture,  so 

*  Ptolemy  writes  :  "  Pierce  not  with  iron  that  part  of  the  body 
which  may  be  governed  by  the  sign  actually  occupied  by  the  moon." 
— Ptolemy,  Tetrabiblos. 


96 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


the  decumbiture  as  to  its  worse  significations  is  regulated  by 
the  revolution  according  to  Lunar  directions. 

35.  Several  Planets  being  Significators  show  that  the 
distemper  is  complicated  of  several  diseases. 

86.  The  Significator  of  the  disease  in  double-bodied  signs 
signifies  a  relapse,  or  that  it  will  change  into  some  other 
distemper. 

37.  The  disease  is  desperate,  when  the  Significator  of  the 
sick  either  in  his  Nativity  or  the  decumbiture,  has  dominion 
in  the  fourth  house. 

38.  That  sign  in  which  the  Significator  of  the  disease  is 
posited,  and  that  to  which  he  casts  any  aspect,  show  the 
members  or  parts  of  the  body  principally  afl[licted. 

39.  When  Mercury  is  unfortunate  he  prejudices  the 
phantasy  and  inward  faculties,  and  thence  threatens 
madness,  etc.,  but  so  much  the  worse  if  Mars  be  the  Planet 
that  afflicteth  him,  for  then  if  he  be  in  an  earthy  sign  it 
threatens  the  Patient  will  make  away  with  himself. 

,  40.  It  is  a  very  bad  sign  when  the  Significator  of  the 
sickness  is  in  the  sixth,  or  the  Lord  of  the  sixth  in  the 
eighth,  or  the  Lord  of  the  eighth,  in  the  sixth  house. 

41.  Mercury  significator  of  a  disease  in  aspect  with 
Saturn,  or  Saturn  significator  in  aspect  of  Mercury,  gives 
suspicion  of  witchcraft  and  enchantment."^ 

*  The  theory  of  witchcraft  is  held  up  to  ridicule  by  most  orthodox 
scientific  men  of  the  present  day  who  have  not  carefully  investigated 
the  matter,  but  it  may  perhaps  be  advantageous  to  some  students  of 
natural  philosophy  to  bear  in  mind  that  Saturn,  amongst  other  things, 
is  the  significator  of  the  occult,  that  he  gives  great  reflective  and  con- 
centrative  powers  ;  and  Mercury  signifies,  amongst  other  things,  the 
magnetic  fluid  or  odylic  force,  also  that  subtlety  and  rapidity  of 
thought  necessary  to  be  exerted  at  the  right  time  in  all  magnetic  ex- 
periments where  the  sensitive  is  to  be  acted  upon  at  a  distance  from 
the  operator,  as  would  usually  be  the  case  in  "  Witchcraft "  or  "  En- 
chantment." These  two  planets  therefore  which  Cardan  quotes  are 
the  very  significators  of  the  subtle  power  and  means  which  must  be 
exerted  in  order  to  bring  about  the  magnetic  effect  termed  by  our 
forefathers  "  Witchcraft,"  and  which  modern  occultists  recognise  as 
the  outcome  of  "  Black  Magic  '  or  evil  magnetism.  If  witchcraft,  or 
rather  an  occult  influence  of  an  evil  nature,  be  shown  in  a  decumbi- 
ture, the  operator  can  often  be  discovered  by  a  consideration  of  the 
4th  and  12th  houses,  together  with  positions  and  configurations  of 
their  lords,  in  the  figure,  having  due  regard  to  Saturn  and  Mercury, 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  97 

42.  A  chronical  disease  (that  is  a  disease  which  usually 
continues  above  a  month)  is  ruled  by  the  motion  of  the  Sun  ; 
acute  diseases  (which  are  more  sharp  and  violent  but  lesr 
lasting)  by  the  motion  of  the  Moon,  according  to  whose 
swifter  or  slower  motion  the  critical  times  are  either 
hastened  or  retarded,*  the  same  being  when  the  Moon 
comes  to  a  sign  contrary  in  both  qualities  to  that  in  which 
she  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease. 

43.  For  curing  a  member,  the  Moon  and  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  should  be  free  from  Impediment,  the  sign  that 
governs  the  part  ascending  and  the  Moon  posited  in  it,  and 
when  you  think  to  do  any  good  to  your  eyes,  let  the  Moon 
be  fortunate,  increasing  in  light  and  by  no  means  in  a  sign 
of  the  Earthly  Triplicit}^ 

44.  Even  the  Fortunes  in  diseases  may  become  Infortunes, 
viz.,  when  the  disease  itself  is  of  their  nature,  or  of  the 
nature  of  things  by  them  signified,  and  in  such  case  the 
infortunes  may  be  said  to  be  fortunes,  for  contraries  are  to 
be  cured  by  contraries. 

APHORISMS  CONCERNING  ELECTIONS. 

1.  An  Election  signifies  nothing  or  very  little  unless  it 
correspond  with  the  Nativity,  and  time  wherein  you  Elect."f* 

2.  If  you  would  have  anything  kept  secret  let  the  Moon 
be  under  the  Sun  beams  when  you  do  it.  J 

and  comparing  carefully  with  the  Radix  and  Revolutionary  Figure 
for  the  year.  It  is  advisable  to  consider  also  the  position  and  con- 
figurations of  Herschel. 

Much  excellent  matter  is  given  in  Claudius  Dariot,  "Judicial 
Astrology,"  on  the  influence  and  powers  of  the  Moon  with  regard  to 
critical  periods  of  sickness  (London,  1598). 

Dr.  Mead,  physician  to  Charles  I.,  also  deals  with  critical  periods 
under  the  influence  of  the  moon  in  his  "  Treatise  Concerning  the  In- 
fluence of  the  Sun  and  Moon  upon  Human  Bodies  "  (London,  1748). 

t  "In  all  authors  that  ever  I  yet  met  with  I  find  there  can  be  no 
time  elected  (in  this  our  astrological  way  of  electing)  advantageous 
to  anyone  whose  nativity  or  time  of  birth  is  not  exactly  known,  for 
according  unto  it  must  you  frame  your  election,  together  with  respect 
to  the  revolutions  of  the  year  :  and  Zael,  Bonatus,  Messahalla  and 
Dariot  say  that  in  case  the  nativity  of  a  man  cannot  be  obtained, 
respect  must  be  had  to  the  time  of  the  question.' —Wm.  Ramsey, 
Astrologia  Restorata  (London,  1654). 

%  Ramsey,  in  his  Table  of  Elections,  under  moon  conjoined  to 
sun,  writes  :  "  Begin  nothing  but  that  thou  wouldst  have  hidden  and 
secret." — ^Astrologia  Restorata. 

7 


98 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


3.  Make  no  new  clothes,  nor  first  put  them  on  when  the 
Moon  is  in  Scorpio,  especially  if  she  be  full  of  light  and 
beheld  of  Mars,  for  they  will  be  apt  to  be  torn  and  quickly 
worn  out. 

4.  "When  in  an  Election  you  cannot  fit  the  Moon  to  two 
Planets  that  you  have  occasion  for,  at  once,  join  her  to  some 
fixed  star  that  is  of  the  nature  of  them  both. 

5.  When  you  would  suddenly  finish  a  thing,  place  the 
Moon  and  significator  in  Moveable  Signs,  but  if  you  would 
have  your  work  last  long,  let  them  be  in  fixed  ones,  and  for 
this  reason  it  becomes  so  difficult  for  a  man  to  attain  to 
do  both. 

6.  The  best  election  a  man  can  make  is  the  place  of  his 
habitation  :  for  if  the  Ascendant  of  the  City  he  dwells  in 
be  the  place  of  his  Ascendant,  he  will  have  his  health  well, 
if  the  Mid-Heaven,  he  will  come  to  preferment,  if  it  be  the 
place  of  the  Sun  in  the  Nativity,  he  will  undoubtedly 
obtain  honour  and  dignities,  if  of  Jupiter  he  will  grow 
rich  ;  if  of  the  Moon  he  will  be  very  happy  in  most  respects 
there. 

7.  Every  man's  geniture  in  some  things  agrees  with,  and 
in  some  differs  from  another's,  we  should  therefore  deal 
with  people  (as  to  important  matters)  only  in  things  wherein 
their  Nativities  sympathize  with  ours,  but  in  other  things 
to  forbear,  and  indeed  we  ought  generally  to  avoid  the 
society  of  a  person  the  Lord  of  whose  Ascendant  is  an 
infortune  and  joined  with  the  Dragon's  Tail  or  any  malevo- 
lent Fixed  Star,  for  unless  there  be  a  great  agreement 
between  our  Nativities  they  will  do  us  some  mischief,  though 
perhaps  against  their  will. 

8.  When  the  significators  of  journies  are  in  watery  signs 
and  the  Infortunes  (or  the  Fortunes  themselves  unfriendly 
posited)  be  elevated  above  them,  the  querent  will  be  much 
troubled  in  his  journies  with  bad  weather  and  tempests,  and 
note  that  the  causes  or  business  of  journies  is  to  be  dis- 
covered from  the  dispositors  of  the  significators. 

9.  You  may  sometimes  use  the  Infortunes  as  Physicians 
do  poisons_,  for  they  produce  strong  effects ;  but  use  them 
like  those,  sparingly  and  with  caution. 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  99 

10.  News  or  reports  raised  and  spread  abroad  whilst  the 
Moon  is  in  the  beginning  of  Scorpio  or  Capricorn  are  gene- 
rally false,  but  if  she  be  with  Jupiter  in  a  masculine  sign 
they  are  like  to  prove  true. 

11.  Begin  not  to  build  whilst  the  Moon  is  in  Scorpio  or 
Pisces  or  when  a  southern  sign  ascends,  nor  let  the  Moon 
or  Lord  of  the  fourth  apply  to  a  Ketrograde  Planet,  for  it 
threatens  that  such  edifice  shall  soon  fall  or  be  ruined.* 

12.  At  Play  and  in  War  it  is  said  that  it  is  considerable  for  a 
man  to  have  his  face  look  towards  a  friendly  Part  of  Heaven, 
and  that  if  both  parties  do  so,  the  contest  will  be  tedious,  if 
neither  of  them,  then  both  in  battle  will  be  much  prejudiced, 
and  in  gamiug  there  will  be  little  won  on  either  side,  but  if 
one  of  them  only  look  that  way,  he  will  soon  conquer  his 
antagonist. 

13.  In  every  Election  let  the  Moon  and  Lord  of  the 
Ascendant  be  free  from  impediment  or  affliction. 

14.  But  if  when  the  Moon  suffers  some  impediment  from 
another  Planet,  thou  art  forced  on  that  day  to  make  an 
election,  let  a  sign  ascend  that  is  either  the  house  or  exalta- 
tion of  that  Planet  so  impediting. 

15.  It  is  best  to  undertake  journies  when  the  significators 
are  in  moveable  signs,  for  they  signify  celerity  and  return 
with  dispatch  of  business,  but  fixed  signs  in  such  cases  are 
very  bad,  so  also  it  is  if  the  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  or  Moon 
happen  to  be  in  the  sixth,  eighth,  or  twelfth  houses. 

16.  It  is  an  undeniable  thing  (in  general)  to  deliver  a 
petition  or  request  to  a  great  person  when  the  Moon  applies 
to  Jupiter,  and  he  is  joined  with  the  Dragon's  Head  in  the 
Mid-heaven. 

Or  the  habitation  will  not,  owing  to  circumstances,  be  enjoyed  long 
by  the  person  who  elects  such  an  unpropitious  time  for  his  work. 
"  To  every  thing  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose  under 
the  heaven.  ...  A  time  to  cast  away  stones  and  a  time  to  gather 
stones  together''  (Ecclesiastes,  c.  3,  vs.  1  and  5).  "  Fools  build  houses 
for  wise  men  to  five  in  "  (Old  Proverb). 


7—2 


100 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


APHORISMS  RELATING  TO  ECLIPSES  AND 
COMETS. 

1.  In  an  Eclipse  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  strength  of 
the  Planet  then  ruling,for  his  significations  will  chiefly  appear. 

2.  Eclipses  of  the  sun  have  powerful  effects,  and  therefore 
if  they  fall  upon  a  very  flourishing  and  promising  crop  they 
generally  damnify  it,  so  that  it  scarce  comes  to  any  thing 
near  what  might  have  been  expected. 

3.  When  at  the  time  of  an  eclipse  the  significator  of  life  in 
any  person's  Radix  shall  be  within  the  Beams  of  the  Anereta 
or  killing  Planet_,  or  of  an  Infortune  not  friendly  disposed, 
such  native  will  incur  extraordinary  hazard  of  his  life. 

4.  In  general  some  Eclipses  of  the  luminaries  at  the  time 
or  even  before  they  happen  raise  showers  and  rain,  others 
great  droughts,  some  violent  winds,  others  earthquakes, 
some  scarcity  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  others  terrible  fires. 

5.  A  Comet  usually  foreshows  the  birth  of  famous  persons 
in  some  time  after  to  happen,  for  he  is  not  said  to  be  born 
under  it  (in  this  sense)  who  is  born  during  the  time  of  its 
appearance,  but  he  that  is  born  in  that  region  or  country 
subject  to  such  an  Angle  or  Figure,  and  hath  his  Sun  and 
Moon  in  its  place,  or  the  Luminaries  and  the  Lord  of  his 
Ascendant  in  cardinal  signs,,  when  the  Comet  rises,  sets  or 
culminates,  and  the  like. 

6.  A  Comet  in  the  East,  signifies  the  rise  of  some  eminent 
lawgiver,  in  the  Mid-heaven,  of  some  very  powerful  King, 
but  seldom  any  such  illustrious  matter  when  'tis  in  the 
West  or  Succedent  houses. 

7.  Comets  when  they  are  immoveable,  signify  seditions, 
but  when  moveable  they  denote  Foreign  Wars,  and  one 
Nation  invading  another ;  in  Cardinal  Signs  the  death  of 
Princes  or  great  men ;  in  the  ninth  house.  Scandal  or 
detriment  to  Religion ;  in  the  tenth  or  twelfth  houses,  the 
pestilence  or  scarcity  of  corn ;  and  in  the  eleventh  house, 
great  slaughter  and  destruction  of  Noblemen. 

8.  If  a  Comet  appear  whilst  a  woman  goes  with  child,  if 
it  be  either  in  the  fourth,  sixth,  or  eighth  month,  such  child 
will  prove  very  prone  to  anger  and  quarrels,  and  if  he  be  of 
quality,  to  sedition. 

9.  No  Eclipse  whatsoever  can  threaten  a  scarcity  or 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  101 

plague  to  the  whole  Earth,  nor  can  the  pestilence  continue 
above  four  years  in  one  place. 

10.  Eclipses  in  the  fourth  house  are  more  strong  and 
efficacious  than  in  the  eighth  or  twelfth  houses,  and  in  the 
Ascendant  more  than  in  the  ninth  or  eleventh. 

11.  An  Eclipse  of  the  Moon  extends  its  effects  as  many 
months,  and  of  the  Sun  so  many  years,  as  it  continues 
hours. 

12.  An  Eclipse  has  a  threefold  effect,  first  powerful  by 
reason  of  the  conjunction  or  opposition  on  which  it  happens; 
second  general,  because  it  slowly  cools,  in  which  respect  it 
is  extended  for  a  long  time.  Thirdly  power  which  it  has 
from  the  Lord  of  the  place  wherein  it  happens  and  other 
positions  at  that  time. 

13.  Eclipses  operate  more  forcibly  on  Cities,  Provinces, 
and  Kingdoms*  than  on  Particular  persons  of  private 
condition,  or  even  upon  Kings  and  Princes,  for  their  effects 
rather  respect  the  multitude. 

14.  When  Eclipses  happen  or  Comets  appear  in  Earthly 
Signs  they  portend  barrenness  and  scarcity  by  reason  of 
excessive  droughts ;  when  in  Watery  Signs  by  reason  of  too 
much  rain,  in  Airy  Signs  they  signify  mighty  winds, 
seditions  and  the  pestilence,  in  Fiery  Signs  terrible  Wars  and 
slaughters. 

APHOEISMS  TOUCHING  WEATHER,  METEORS,  ETC. 

1.  When  Saturn  passes  out  of  one  sign  into  another,  you 
may  expect  for  several  days  together  strange  Meteors  and 
splendid  sights  or  apparitions  in  the  heavens. 

2.  When  signs  very  different  from  the  common  course  of 
nature  appear  about  the  Sun,  or  in  or  about  the  Moon, 
Stars,  or  any  part  of  heaven,  if  thou  observe  the  place  where 
they  appear,  and  the  figure  of  the  heaven  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end,  thou  mayest  come  to  understand  what  they 
portend.f 

*  "  Earthquakes  generally  follow  close  on  the  heels  of  eclipses."— 
Commander  Morrison,  E.N.,  "Rules  for  predicting  Earthquakes," 
etc. 

t  Sybilina  Tiburtina,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  the  Emperor 
Augustus,  observed  a  brilliant  star  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  4  B.C. 


102 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


3.  The  Lord  of  the  Interlunary  Figure  signifies  very 
much  as  to  the  qualit}'-  of  the  Air,  and  also  the  Planet  that 
beholds  him^  especially  if  they  be  in  Cardinal  Signs. 

4.  When  Saturn  is  Combust  in  the  houses  of  Mars,  and 
Mars  beholds  him,  he  often  begets  conical  figures  which 
are  seen  in  the  air  composed  of  vapours  that  ascend,  and 
are  signs  of  an  earthquake  to  ensue. 

5.  Saturn  and  Mars,  and  Mars  and  the  Sun,  and  Mars 
and  Mercury,  cause  hail ;  Saturn  most  in  summer,  Sol  and 
Mercury  most  in  autumn,  and  those  that  cause  hail  in  these 
two  quarters  cause  snow  in  the  winter  and  spring. 

yeoi  «5/««^ls  Caus(  *  6.  Saturn  with  the  Luminaries,  Jupiter  with  Mercury  and 
^f5e  '^if(ds  ii.s^  Mars  with  Venus,  make  an  Apertio  portarum  or  an  open- 
ihhsu^  1^  fticin  i'^g  of  the  gates,  and  usually  cause  some  notable  change  of 
ir  c^se  <^^^!r  Weather. 

clRcAi}  efffcfs         7.  When  about  the  beginning  of  winter  Saturn  shall 
cury  Actih?  el?  ''     dispose  of  the  Moon,  expect  unusual  Colds  with  a  cloudy 
z.A^y^  t^so      season  and  rain. 

8.  Whenever  Saturn  is  joined  to  the  Sun  the  heat  is 
remitted  and  the  cold  increased,  which  alone  may  be  a 
sufficient  testimony  of  the  truth  of  Astrology. 

9.  When  Mars  and  Mercury  are  joined  and  behold  the 
Moon  or  Lord  of  the  Ascendant  in  the  sixth  or  seventh 
house,  they  portend  a  great  drought  to  ensue. 

10.  That  Star  has  a  great  efficacy  on  the  air,  to  which  the 
Moon  shall  be  first  joined  after  her  conjunction,  opposition 
or  square  with  the  Sun. 

She  pointed  it  out  to  the  Emperor,  and  told  him  it  indicated  that  a 
child  would  be  born  of  a  virgin,  who  should  be  greater  than  he,  and 
she  urged  him  to  worship  the  child. — See  Pearce,  "Text-book  of 
Astrology"  (London,  1879). 

It  was  by  observing  a  figure  of  the  heavens  on  the  appearance  of  a 
strange  star  that  the  Magi  knew  of  the  birth  of  our  Lord,  for  we  read  : 
"  They  came  from  the  east  to  Jerusalem,  saying,  Where  is  he  that  is 
born  King  of  the  Jews'?  for  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  Uast  and  are 
come  to  worship  him.' " — St.  Matthew,  c.  2,  verses  1  and  2.  Doctor 
Swadling,  in  "Divinity  an  Eneray  to  Astrology"  (London,  1653), 
writes  as  follows  :  "  Saint  Chrystom  says,  '  By  a  Star  did  God  direct 
the  Gentiles,  not  by  an  Angela  not  by  a  Prophet,  not  by  a  Voice  from 
heaven,  because  he  would  condescend  to  their  weakness  and  teach 
them  by  such  things  as  they  were  most  acquainted  with,'  and  here 
because  these  Arabians  were  astrologers,  and  well  versed  in  the  stars, 
he  calleth  them  to  himself  by  a  Star.'' 


CHOICE  APHORISMS  FROM  THE  SEVEN  SEGMENTS  OF  CARDAN.  103 

11.  The  mixture  of  the  beams  of  Jove  and  Mars  in  moist 
signs  gives  Thunder  with  sudden  showers. 

12.  Jupiter  naturally  raises  North  Winds,  Saturn 
Easterly,  Mars  Western,  Venus  Southern,  and  Mercury 
Mixed  Winds,  according  as  he  applies  to  other  Planets.* 

SOME  APHORISMS  RELATING  TO  HUSBANDRY. 

1.  If  you  prune  your  vines  when  the  Moon  is  at  full  in 
Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio,  Sagittarius,  neither  worms  nor  birds 
will  infest  your  grapes. 

2.  Graft  not  Trees,  the  Moon  waning,  or  not  to  be  seen, 
and  if  you  shear  sheep  in  her  increase  their  wool  will  grow 
again  the  better. 

3.  Fruits  and  Wood  for  use  should  be  cut  in  the  decrease 
of  the  Moon,  but  if  you  would  have  Timber  to  keep  long,  fell 
it  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  winter,  the  Moon  being 
under  the  earth,  and  beheld  by  Saturn,  for  that  will  prevent 
its  rotting,  and  render  it  exceedingly  hard  and  durable. 

4.  But  fire  wood  and  what  you  would  have  grow  quickly 
again,  cut  when  the  Moon  is  above  the  Earth  in  the  first 
quarter  joined  either  to  Yenus  or  Jupiter. 

5.  Sow  or  Plant  when  the  Moon  is  in  Taurus,  Yirgo  or 
Scorpio  in  good  Aspect  of  Saturn,  but  when  she  is  in 
Cancer  set  or  sow  all  kinds  of  pulse,  and  in  Libra  or 
Capricorn  dress  your  gardens  and  trim  your  small  trees  and 
shrubs. 

6.  Saturn  in  fixed  signs  causes  scarcity  of  corn,  dear 
years,  and  the  death  of  many  men. 

7.  When  Trees  blossom  they  are  most  apt  to  be  affected 
with  injuries  from  the  Heavens,  for  then  they  are  like 
teeming  women,  and  when  they  have  put  out  their  fruits 
like  Nurses  giving  suck,  which  can  endure  more  than  when 
they  went  with  child ;  and  therefore  if  Eclipses  happen  whilst 
a  tree  is  so  blooming,  it  most  times  causes  a  scarcity  of  that 
kind  of  fruit  that  year,  and  indeed  the  plenty  of  corn  and 
fruit  is  not  much  discovered  from  the  vernal  figure  or 
Revolution  of  the  World,  as  from  the  temperature  of  the 
air,  in  moisture,  dryness,  or  inequality,  as  also  from  the  new 

*  Dr.  Goad,  the  writer  of  "  Astro-Meteorologica  "  (London,  1686), 
bears  out  the  aphorisms  touching  the  weather. 


104 


THE  astrologer's  GUIDE. 


and  full  Moons,  and  risings  of  the  Stars  ;  and  Eclipses,  especi- 
ally happening  then  whilst  things  respectively  blossom. 

8.  A  Malevolent  Planet  being  Lord  of  the  year,  though 
fortunate,  generally  hurts  all  fruits  of  the  earth,  but  those 
particularly  signified  by  himself. 

APHORISMS  RELATING  TO  GENERAL  ACCI- 
DENTS. 

1.  Saturn  obtains  Kingdoms  or  Supremacy  of  power  by 
labour,  fraud,  and  infamy;  Mars  by  valour,  rapine  and 
cruelty  ;  but  Jupiter  by  Justice  and  great  opinion  of  good- 
ness and  honesty. 

2.  When  Saturn  is  in  Libra  and  Jupiter  in  Cancer,  great 
changes  and  alterations  shall  happen  in  the  world. 

3.  For  discovering  such  grand  mutations  we  should  well 
consider  the  great,  mean,  and  lesser  conjunctions  of  the 
Planets  in  the  several  Trigons,  the  removes  of  the  Superiors 
from  one  sign  to  another,  as  also  their  applications  to  the 
fixed  Stars. 

4.  Likewise  the  changes  of  the  Absides*  of  the  Planets 
cause  mutations  in  governments  and  laws,  which  is  a  point 
very  much  to  be  regarded. 

5.  Mercury  with  an  unfortunate  Planet  in  the  eleventh, 
denotes  the  establishment  of  some  severe  or  unjust  laws  in 
the  world. 

6.  A  Conjunction  of  Mars  and  Saturn  in  the  sixth  or 
eighth  house,  especially  in  a  humane  sign,  signifies  a  great 
Pestilence. 

7.  When  in  the  Radix  of  any  City  Mars  shall  be  in  the 
Mid-heaven,  the  Inhabitants  will  be  inclined  to  Sedition  : 
If  Saturn  be  there  they  will  be  very  mischievous,  yet  very 
laborious. 

8.  If  Wars  be  signified  note  the  Angle  of  the  figure 
wherein  Mars  is  posited,  for  from  that  Part  the  Enemies 
shall  come. 

A  very  old  term  used  to  denote  the  points  of  situation  termed 
Apogee  and  Perigee. 

END  OF  THE  APHORISMS  OF  CARDAN. 

[Whereas  mention  is  often  made  in  the  foregoing  treatise,  of  the 
Fixed  Stars,  and  their  eminent  use  in  Astrology,  we  have  thought  fit 
for  the  benefit  of  the  reader  to  add  the  following  table  of  their  places.] 


w  •-3 


(?q  <M     ci  ^ 


Q  ^  ;z;  j»  12;  15 

.  \0  r-i  00 
S  CO  'TtH  10 


^'  S  J-  s  s  s 


^1  .i 


^ 


<  CO  (M  Cl  CO  CO 


J2;  ;z;  Iz;  M  52;  !2; 
as  CO  (M  o 
cq  xc      CO  <M 


S  X)  O  X)  D  XD 


^  i<i  ; 


^  1^ 
^i£  r-SS 


A  CATALOGUE  OF   FIFTY  OF  THE  MOST  PEINCIPAL  FIXED  STAES, 

Showing  their  true  Longitude,  Latitude,  Magnitude  and  Natures,  to  the  Year  of  Chmt  1700 
Jan  1  For  every  Year  before,  subtract,  and  every  Year  after  add  50  seconds  to  or 
from  their  Longitude  in  the  Table,  and  you  have  their  true  places  for  any  time  past, 
present,  or  to  come. 


The  Names  of  Stars. 


The  Star  in  the  end  of  the  Wing  of 
The  Head  of  Andromeda 
Whale's  Belly 
The  Girdle  of  Andromeda 
Southern  Star  in  the  former  Horn  of  the 


The  following  Horn  of  the  Ram 
Bright  Star  in  the  Head  of  the  Ram 
The  left  Foot  of  Andromeda  . 
The  Bright  Star  in  the  Jaw  of  the  Whale 
The  Head  of  Medusa  . 
The  middle  and  bright  Star  of  tlie  seven 


Longi- 
tude. 


r  5  0 
TlO  9 
Tl3  47 
T26  11 
T28  59 


Lati- 
tude. 


12  35n 
25  42n 


25  59n 
7  8n 


t29  45 
0  3  28 
OlO  1 
OlO  19 
0  21  59 
0  25  46 


8  29n 

9  57n 
27  46n 
12  37s 
22  22n 

4  On 


 -thr^Ey^th^S^l 

The  South  Eye  called  Aldebaran,  Patili 
The  Bright  Foot  of  Orion,  Rij 
The  former  Shoulder  of  Orion 
The  Shee-Goat 


n  4  15 
n  5  34 
ni2  49 
ni6  45 
ni7  48 


2  36s 
5  31s 
31  lis 
16  53s 
22  5lN 


The  former  Star  in  Orion's  Belt 
The  middle  Star  in  Orion's  Belt 
The  highest  Star  in  the  Head  of  Orion 
The  Star  in  the  extremity  of  the  So.  Horn  of  the 
The  following  Shoulder  of  Orion 


nl8  12 
nl9  16 
nl9  33 
n20  34 
n24  34 


23  38s 

24  33s 
13  26s 

2  14s 
16  6s 


Propus 

The  right  Shoulder  of  Auriga  . 
The  bright  Foot  of  Gemmini  . 
Higher  Head  of  n  Castor,  Apollo 
Pollux,  Hercules 


n  26  44 
n27  14 
s  4  53 
s  16  30 
05I9  5 


0  13s 
21  27n 


The  Lesser  1 


The  JSlorth  Assellus 
The  South  Assellus 
The  Heart  of  Hydra 
Basiliscus,  Cor  Leonis, — Regulus 


1^1  40 


3  19 

4  30 


15  57s 
1  14n 


22  24s 
0  26n 


The  middle  SiW)-  in  me  Lyon's  JSfeck 


5  25  22 


"B~¥7n 


The  hack  of  the  Lyon 
The  Tail  of  the  Lyon  . 
Vindemiatrix 

The  Star  under  the  Virgin's  Girdle 


11]^  7  3 
iijpl7  25 
Ti)?  5  45 
7  17 


14  20n 
12  18N 
16  15n 
8  41n 


The  Virgin's  Spiek,  Arista 
South  Ballance 
North  Ballance 
Left  Hand  of  Ophiuchus 
Higher  Star  in  the  Forehead  of  the  Scorpion 


The  left  knee  of  Ophiucus 
The  Scorpion's  Heart,  Antaf  es . 
The  right  knee  of  Ophiucus 
Bright  Star  in  the  hand  of  the  Water- 
Bright  Star  of  the  Vulture 
The  Mouth  of  Pegasus 


:£>19  38 

T1\10  53 
11\  15  10 

H\28  8 
TT|_28  58 


1  59N 

0  25n 
8  35n 

17  19n 

1  5n 


^  5  2 
^  5  35 
^  13  48 
Vf 27  31 
Yf 27  31 
7  24 


11  30n 
■4  27s 

7  18n 

8  ION 
29  2lN 
22  7n 


Fomahaut 
Marchab  Pegasi 

South  Tail  of  the  Whale 


1^29  33 
ssl9  18 
^•29  18 


21  OS 

19  26N 

20  47s 


ON  SALE  BY  GEORGE  REDWAY. 

Cloth,  lettered,  288^^.,  demy  8vo.    Price  10«.  6d. 
THE 

TEXT-BOOK  OF  ASTROLOGY. 

VOL.  I.—GENETHLIALOGY. 
By  ALFRED  J.  PEARCE, 

Editor  of  Zadkjel's  Almanack  since  187G. 


LONDON  :  COUSINS  &  CO.,  3,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


This  is  the  only  comprehensive  work  on  Astrology  extant.  It  contains 
scores  of  examples,  and  many  useful  Tables. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
PRICE  5s. 

THE  SCIEI^OE  OF  THE  STARS. 

APocket  Epitome  of  the  ancient  Science  of  Astrology  in  all  its  branches; 
containing  Tables  of  Houses  for  G-reenwich,  Edinburgh,  Calcutta  and 
New  York,  newly  computed. 


LONDON:  SIMPKIN,  MARSHALL  &  CO. 


ON  SALE  BY  GEORGE  REDWAY. 


A  Selection 

FROM 

Mr.  Redway's  Publications. 


GEOKGE  REBWAY, 
15,  YORK  STREETj  COVENT  GARDEN,  LONDON. 
1886. 


15,  York  Street,  Covent  Garden, 

London,  May,  188G. 


Nearly  ready. 

Sultan  Stork, 

And  other  Stories,  Sketches,  and  Ballads. 

BY 

WILLIAM  MAKEPEACE  THACKERAY. 

Now  First  Collected. 


None  of  these  pieces  are  included  in  the  two  recently  pub- 
lished volumes  issued  by  Messrs.  Smith,  Elder,  and  Co. 

With  an  Appendix  containing  the  Bibliography  of  Thackeray 
(first  published  in  1880),  in  a  revised  and  enlarged  form. 


CONTENTS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

I.  PROSE. 

1.  SULTAN  STORK :  Being  the  One  Thousand  and  Second  Night.  By 

Major  G.  0'.  0.  Gahag-an.  [1842.] 

2.  LITTLE  SPITZ.    A  Lenten  Anecdote.  [1841.] 

3.  DICKENS  IN  FRANCE.    An  Account  of  a  French  dramatic  version  of 

"  Nicholas  Nickleby,"  performed  at  a  Paris  theatre.  [1842.] 

4.  THE  PARTIE  FINE.  [1844.] 

5.  ARABELLA;  or,  the  Moral  of  the  Partie  Fine.    By  Lancelot  Wag- 

STAPF,  Esq.  [1844.] 

6.  GOING  TO  SEE  A  MAN  HANGED.    [1840  ] 

7.  UNPUBLISHED  LETTER  (March,  1844)  TO  THOMAS  FRASER, 

OF  WHISTLE  BINKIE. 

8.  EXHIBITION  GOSSIP.  [1842.] 

9.  LETTERS  ON  THE  FINE  ARTS.  [1843.] 

10.  PARIS  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1833.] 

II.  VERSE. 

11.  SATIRICAL  VERSES  descriptive  of  (1)  Lotjis  Philippe;  (2)  Mr. 

Bkaham  ;  (3)  N.  M.  Rothschild,  Esq. ;  (4)  A.  Bunn  ;  (5)  Sir  Pbteb 
Laurie  (Petrus  Laurens).  [1833.] 

12.  LOVE  IN  FETTERS.    A  Tottenham  Court  Road  Ditty.  [1833.] 

13.  "  DADDY,  I'M  HUNGRY."    Scene  in  an  Irish  Coachmaker's  Family. 

  [1843.]^ 

THE  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  THACKERAY.  A  Bibliographical  List, 
arranged  in  chronological  order,  of  the  published  Writings  in  Prose  and 
Verse,  and  the  Sketches  and  Drawings,  of  William  Makepeace  Thacke- 
ray (1829-1886).    Revised  and  Enlarged. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


4 


ME.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


In  crown  Svo,  in  French  grey  wrapper.    Price  6s. 
A  few  copies  on  Large  Paper.    Price  10s.  6d. 

The  Bibliography  of  Swinburne ; 

A  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  LIST,  ARRANGED  IN  CHRONOLOGICAL 
ORDER,  OF  THE  PUBLISHED  WRITINGS 
IN  VERSE  AND  PROSE 

OP 

ALGERNON   CHARLES  SWINBURNE 

(1857-1884). 


This  Bibliography  commences  with  the  brief-lived  College 
Magazine,  to  which  Mr.  Swinburne  was  one  of  the  chief  con- 
tributors when  an  undergraduate  at  Oxford  in  1857-8.  Besides 
a  careful  enumeration  and  description  of  the  first  editions  of  all 
his  separately  published  volumes  and  pamphlets  in  verse  and 
prose,  the  original  appearance  is  duly  noted  of  every  poem, 
prose  article,  or  letter,  contributed  to  any  journal  or  magazine 
{e.g.f  Once  a  WeeJc,  The  Spectator ^  The  Cornhill  Magazine,  The 
Morning  Star,  The  Fortnightly  Review,  The  Examiner,  The  Dark 
Blue,  The  Academy,  The  Athenceum,  The  Tatler,  Belgravia,  The 
Gentleman^ s  Magazine,  La  Bepuhlique  des  Lettres,  Le  Bappel,  The 
Glasgow  University  Magazine,  The  Daily  Telegraph,  &c.,  &c.), 
whether  collected  or  uncollected.  Among  other  entries  will  be 
found  a  remarkable  novel,  published  in  instalments,  and  never 
issued  in  a  separate  form,  and  several  productions  in  verse  not 
generally  known  to  be  from  Mr.  Swinburne's  pen.  The  whole 
forms  a  copious  and  it  is  believed  approximately  complete  record 
of  a  remarkable  and  brilliant  literary  career,  extending  already 
over  a  quarter  of  a  century. 

%*  ONLY  250  COPIES  PRINTED. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  RED  WAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


5 


HINTS    TO  COLLECTORS 

OF  ORIGINAL  EDITIONS  OP 
THE  WORKS  OF 

Charles  Dickens. 

BY 

CHARLES   PLUMPTRE  JOHNSON. 

Trmted  on  hand-made  paper j  and  bound  in  vellum. 
Crown  8vo,  6s, 

The  Edition  is  limited  to  five  hundred  and  fifty  copies,  fifty  of 
which  are  on  large  paper. 


"Enthusiastic  admirers  of  Dickens  are  greatly  beholden  to  Mr.  C.  P. 
Johnson  for  his  useful  and  interesting  '  Hints  to  Collectors  of  Original 
Editions  of  the  Works  of  Charles  Dickens'  (Redway).  The  book  is  a  com- 
panion to  the  similar  guide  to  collectors  of  Thackeray's  first  editions,  is 
compiled  with  the  like  cai-e,  and  produced  with  the  like  finish  and  taste." — 
The  Saturday  Review. 

"  This  is  a  sister  volume  to  the  *  Hints  to  Collectors  of  First  Editions  of 
Thackeray/  which  we  noticed  a  month  or  two  ago.  The  works  of  Dickens, 
with  a  few  notable  '  Dickensiana/  make  up  fifty-eight  numbers  ....  and 
Mr.  Johnson  has  further  augmented  the  present  volume  with  a  list  of  thirty- 
six  plays  founded  on  Dickens's  works,  and  another  list  of  twenty-three  published 
portraits  of  Dickens.  As  we  are  unable  to  detect  any  slips  in  his  work,  we 
must  content  ourselves  with  thanking  him  for  the  correctness  of  his  annotations. 
It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  our  praise  of  the  elegant  format  of  these  books. 
.  .  .  ." — The  Academy. 

"  These  two  elegantly-produced  little  books,  printed  on  hand-made  paper 
and  bound  in  vellum,  should  be  welcomed  by  the  intending  collector  of  the 
works  of  the  two  authors  under  treatment,  and  the  more  experienced  biblio- 
grapher will  find  the  verbatim  reproductions  of  the  original  title-pages  not 

without  use  For  the  purpose  of  checking  the  correct  numbers  of  these 

illustrations,  verifying  the  collations,  and  detecting  possible  frauds  .... 
Mr.  Johnson's  books  are  unique.  The  '  Hints,'  moreover,  incorporated  in  his 
prefaces  ....  and  the  *  Notes'  appended  to  each  entry  are  serviceable,  and 
often  shrewd ;  indeed,  the  whole  labour,  evidently  one  of  love,  bestowed  upon 
the  books  is  exceptionally  accurate  and  commendable,  and  we  hope  to  welcome 
Mr.  Johnson  at  no  distant  date  as  a  bibliographer  of  a  more  pretentious 
subject." — Time. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN, 


6 


ME.  KEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


HINTS    TO  COLLECTORS 

OF  ORIGINAL  EDITIONS  OF 
THE  WORKS  OF 

William  Makepeace  Thackeray. 

BY 

CHARLES   PLUMPTRE  JOHNSON. 

Printed  on  hand-made  ]jaj}er  and  bound  in  vellum.   Croiun  Svo,  6s. 

The  Edition  is  limited  to  five  hundred  and  fifty  copies^ 
twenty-five  of  which  are  on  large  paper. 


A  guide  to  those  who  are  great  admirers  of  Thackeray,  and  are 
collecting  first  editions  of  his  works.  The  dainty  little  volume,  bound  in 
parchment  and  printed  on  hand-made  paper,  is  very  concise  and  convenient  in 
form ;  on  each  page  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  title-page  of  the  work  mentioned 
thereon,  a  collation  of  pages  and  illustrations,  useful  hints  on  the  differences 

in  editions,  with  other  matters  indispensable  to  collectors  Altogether  it 

represents  a  large  amount  of  labour  and  experience." — The  Spectator. 

Those  who  remember  with  pain  having  seen  the  original  yellow  backs  of 
Thackeray's  works  knocked  to  pieces  and  neglected  years  ago,  may  be  recom- 
mended to  read  Mr.  C.  P.  Johnson's  '  Hints  to  Collectors.' " — The  Saturday/ 
Review. 

"  .  .  .  .  Mr.  Johnson  has  evidently  done  his  work  with  so  much  loving  care 
that  we  feel  entire  confidence  in  his  statements.  The  prices  that  he  has  afiixed 
in  every  case  form  a  valuable  feature  of  the  volume,  which  has  been  produced 
in  a  manner  worthy  of  its  subject  matter." — The  Academy. 

"  The  list  of  works  which  Mr.  Johnson  supplies  is  likely  to  be  of  high 
interest  to  Thackeray  collectors.  His  preliminary  remarks  go  beyond  this  not 
very  narrow  circle,  and  have  a  value  for  all  collectors  of  modern  works." — 
Notes  and  Queries. 

" ....  It  is  choicely  printed  at  the  Chiswick  Press ;  and  the  author, 
Mr.  Charles  Plumptre  Johnson,  treats  the  subject  with  evident  knowledge  and 

enthusiasm  It  is  not  a  Thackeray  Bibliography,  but  a  careful  and 

minute  description  of  the  first  issues,  with  full  collations  and  statement  of  the 

probable  cost  Mr.  Johnson  addresses  collectors,  but  is  in  addition  a 

sincere  admirer  of  the  greatest  satirist  of  the  century." — Book  Lore. 

"  .  .  .  .  This  genuine  contribution  to  the  bibliography  of  Thackeray  will 
be  invaluable  to  all  collectors  of  the  great  novelist's  works,  and  to  all  who 
treasure  an  '  editio  princeps'  the  account  here  given  of  the  titles  and  charac- 
teristics of  the  first  issues  will  form  a  trustworthy  guide  The  special 

features  which  will  enable  the  purchaser  at  once  to  settle  any  question  of 
authenticity  in  copies  offered  for  sale  are  carefully  collated." — The  Publisher's 
Circular." 


GEOKGE  EEDWAY,  YOEK  STKEET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


7 


In  crown  Svo,  2  vols.,  cloth.    Price  6s. 

The  Valley  of  Sorek. 

BY 

GERTRUDE   M.  GEORGE. 

With  a  Critical  Introduction  by  Richard  Herne  Shepherd. 


**  There  is  in  tlie  book  a  high  and  pure  moral  and  a  distinct  conception 
of  character  The  dramatis  personcB  ....  are  in  reality  strongly- 
individual,  and  surprise  one  with  their  inconsistencies  just  as  real  human 

beings  do  There  is  something  powerful  in  the  way  in  which  the  reader 

is  made  to  feel  both  the  reality  and  the  untrustworthiness  of  his  [the  hero's] 
religious  fervour,  and  the  character  of  the  atheist,  Graham,  is  not  less  strongly 

and  definitely  conceived  It  is  a  work  that  shows  imagination  and  moral 

insight,  and  we  shall  look  with  much  anticipation  for  another  from  the  same 
hand." — Contemporary  Review. 

"  The  characters  are  clearly  defined,  the  situations  are  strong,  and  the 
interest  evoked  by  them  is  considerable.  The  women  in  particular  are  admi- 
rably drawn.'* — Athenceum. 

"  Henry  Westgate,  the  hero,  is  a  study  of  no  slight  psychological  interest. 
....  It  is  the  development  of  this  character  for  good  and  for  evil,  through 
the  diverse  influence  of  friends  and  circumstances  ....  that  Miss  George 

has  portrayed  with  singular  vigour  and  skilful  analysis  It  is  impossible 

to  read  this  story  without  wonderment  at  the  maturity  and  self-restraint  of  its 
style,  and  at  the  rare  beauty  and  pathos,  mingled  with  strength,  which  mark 
every  page." — Literary  World. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


8 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Fifth  Thousand. 
An  edition  de  luxe  in  demy  ISmo. 
Bound  infancy  clothj  uncut  edges.    Price  2s. 

Tobacco  Talk  and  Smokers' 
Gossip. 

An  Amusing  Miscellany  of  Fact  and  Anecdote  relating  to 
The  Great  Plant'*  in  all  its  Forms  and  Uses,  including 
a  Selection  from  Nicotian  Literature. 


**  One  of  the  best  books  of  gossip  we  have  met  for  some  time.  .  ^  .  .  It  is 
literally  crammed  full  from  beginning  to  end  of  its  148  pages  with  well- 
selected  anecdotes,  poems,  and  excerpts  from  tobacco  literature  and  history." — 
Graphic. 

"The  smoker  should  be  grateful  to  the  compilers  of  this  pretty  little 

volume  No  smoker  should  be  without  it,  and  an ti -tobacconists  have 

only  to  turn  over  its  leaves  to  be  converted." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"Something  to  please  smokers;  and  non-smokers  may  be  interested  in 
tracing  the  effect  of  tobacco — the  fatal,  fragrant  herb — on  our  literature." — 
Literary  World.   

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


NEW  BOOK  BY  MISS  BAUGHAN. 
The 

Handbook  of  Physiognomy. 

BY 

ROSA  BAUGHAN. 

Demy  8vo,  wrapper j  Is. 

"  The  merit  of  her  book  consists  in  the  admirable  clearness  of  her  descrip- 
tions of  faces.  So  vivid  is  the  impression  produced  by  them  that  she  is  able 
to  dispense  with  illustrations',  the  reader  using  the  faces  of  his  acquaintances 
for  that  purpose.  The  classification,  too,  is  good,  although  the  astrological 
headings  may  be  regarded  by  the  profane  as  fanciful.  Physiognomy  may  now 
be  scientifically  studied  by  means  of  composite  photography.** — Pall  Mall 
Gazette. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


9 


In  preparation. 
Price  to  Subscribers,  6s. 

The  Praise  of  Ale; 

OE, 

Songs,  Ballads,  Epigrams,  and  Anecdotes  relating  to 

Beer,  Malt,  and  Hops. 

Collected  and  arranged  by 
W.   T.    MARCH  ANT. 

The  volume  will  contain  much  curious  and  out-of-the-way  information, 
embracing  a  short  sketch  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  art  of  brewing  in 
this  country  j  an  account  of  the  laws  relating  to  beer,  and  the  statutes  against 
drunkenness ;  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  "  malt  worms*'  and  mug-house 
clubs ;  and  the  obsolete  phraseology  of  "  toss-pots,"  such  as  "  super-nagulum,'* 
"  upsee-freeze,*'  "  shoeing  horns,"  and  "  carousing  the  hunter's  hoop."  The 
author  will  pay  attention  to  the  drinking  customs  more  or  less  connected  with 
the  Church — Whitsun  Ales,  Bride  Ales,  Bride  Bush,  Bride  Wain,  and  the 
like  J  the  chants  of  the  wassail-bowl,  of  the  Hock  Cart,  and  the  Sheepshearing 
and  Harvest  Home  rejoicings — 

'*  Here*s  a  health  to  the  Barley  mow,  brave  boys. 
Here's  a  health  to  the  Barley  mow" — 

and  Brazenose  songs  in  honour  of  the  brew  for  which  that  college  is  renowned. 
Then  there  are  lyrics  pertaining  to  particular  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  as 
the  songs  of  the  threshers  and  tinkers,  sailors  and  soldiers,  and  the  clubs, 
which  may  be  considered  as  forming  a  class  of  themselves.  This  work  will 
doubtless  prove  a  valuable  and  pleasant  addition  to  the  library  of  the  student 
of  history  and  lover  of  poetry. 


'US'  SEND    FOR  PROSPECTUS. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


10 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


In  crown  Svo,  price  6s. 
Illustrated  with  magical  signs,  and  a  symbolical  frontispiece  etched 
hy  Machaness,  from  a  design  by  the  Author. 

Magic^ 

WHITE  AND  BLACK; 
Or,  The  Science  of  Finite  and  Injintte  Lije. 

CONTAINING 

Practical  Hints  for  Students  of  Occultism,  and  all  who  wish 
to  know. 

BY 

FRANZ   HARTMANN,  M.D. 

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


In  preparation. 

NEW  TRANSLATION  OP  "THE  HEPTAMERON." 


The  Heptameron; 

OE, 

Tales  and  Novels  of  Margaret,  Queen  of  Navarre. 

Now  first  done  completely  into  English  prose  and  verse,  from  the 
original  French,  by  Akthuk  Machen. 

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


11 


Fourth  Edition.    With  Engraved  Frontispiece.    In  crown  8vo,  5s. 

Cosmo    de'   Medici : 

j4n  Historical  Tragedy.    And  other  Poems. 

BY 

RICHARD   HENGIST  HORNE, 

Author  of  "  Orion." 

"  This  tragedy  is  the  work  of  a  poet  and  not  of  a  playwright.  Many  of 
the  scenes  abound  in  vigour  and  tragic  intensity.  If  the  structure  of  the 
drama  challenges  comparison  with  the  masterpieces  of  the  Elizabethan  stage, 
it  is  at  least  not  unworthy  of  the  models  which  have  inspired  it." — Times. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


Fcap.  8vo,  parchment. 

Tamerlane  and  other  Poems. 

BY 

EDGAR    ALLAN  POE. 

First  publislied  at  Boston  in  1827,  and  now  first  republislied 
from  a  unique  copy  of  the  original  edition,  with  a  preface  by 
IlicHARD  Herne  Shepherd. 

Mr.  Swinburne  has  generously  praised  "  so  beautiful  and  valuable  a  little 
volume,  full  of  interest  for  the  admirers  of  Poe's  singular  and  exquisite 
genius." 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


12 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Just  ready  f  in  demy  8?;o,  choicely  printed ^  and  hound  in  Japanese 
parchment.    Price  7s.  6d. 

Primitive  Symbolism 

As  Illustrated  in  Phallic  Worship  ;  or,  the  Eeproductive 
Principle. 

BY 

The  late  HODDER  M.  WESTROPP. 

With  an  Introduction  by  General  Forlong,  Author  of 
"Eivers  of  Life." 


This  work  is  a  multum  in  parvo  of  the  growth  and  spread  of  Phallicism, 
as  we  commonly  call  the  worship  of  nature  or  fertilizing  powers.  I  felt,  when 
solicited  to  enlarge  and  illustrate  it  on  the  sudden  death  of  the  lamented 
author,  that  it  would  be  desecration  to  touch  so  complete  a  compendium  by 
one  of  the  most  competent  and  soundest  thinkers  who  have  written  on  this 
world-wide  faith.  None  knew  better  or  saw  more  clearly  than  Mr.  Westropp 
that  in  this  oldest  symbolism  and  worship  lay  the  foundations  of  all  the  goodly 
systems  we  call  Religions." — J.  G.  R.  Forlong. 

"  A  well-selected  repertory  of  facts  illustrating  this  subject,  which  should 
be  read  by  all  who  are  interested  in  the  study  of  the  growth  of  religious." — 
Westminster  Review. 


GEORaE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


In  large  crown  8vo.    Frice  3s.  6cZ. 

Sithron,  the  Star  Stricken. 

Translated    {Ala    hereJcet    Allah)  from   an    ancient  Arabic 
Manuscript. 

BY 

SALEM  BEN  UZAIR,  of  Bassora. 

"  This  very  remarkable  book,  *  Sithron,'  ...  is  a  bold,  pungent,  audacious 
satire  upon  the  ancient  religious  belief  of  the  Jews.  .  .  .  No  one  can  read  the 
book  without  homage  to  the  force,  the  tenderness,  and  the  never-failing  skill 
of  its  writer." — St.  James's  Gazette. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MB.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS, 


13 


THE  ONLY  PUBLISHED  BIOGRAPHY  OP  JOHN  LEECH. 


An  edition  de  luxe  in  demy  18mo.    Price  Is. 

John  Leech^ 

ARTIST    AND  HUMOURIST. 
A    Biographical  Sketch. 

BY 

FEED.   G.  KITTON. 

New  Edition,  revised. 


*'  In  the  absence  of  a  fuller  biography  we  cordially  welcome  Mr.  Kitton's 
interesting  little  sketch." — Notes  and  Queries. 

"  The  multitudinous  admirers  of  the  famous  artist  will  find  this  touching 
monograph  well  worth  careful  reading  and  preservation." — Daily  Chronicle. 

"The  very  model  of  what  such  a  memoir  should  be." — OrapMc. 


GEORaE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


Nearly  ready,  price  10s.  Qd, 

The  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs; 

OE, 

The  Story  of  the  Forty  Morns  and  Eves, 

Written  in  Turkish  by  Sheykh-Zada,  and  now  done  into 
Enghsh  by  E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  M.R.A.S. 

The  only  complete  translation  of  this  collection  of  tales  that 
has  hitherto  appeared  in  any  European  language  is  that  pub- 
lished in  German  by  Dr.  Behrnauer  in  1861.  A  complete  text 
of  the  romance  contains  eighty  subordinate  stories,  and  this  is 
the  number  given  by  Behrnauer  ;  but  MSS.  differ  widely  in  the 
selection  of  such  tales,  and  Mr.  Gibb  has  collected  one  hundred 
and  twelve  distinct  stories  from  different  versions  that  have 
come  under  his  notice.  Among  these,  all  of  which  will  appear 
in  the  forthcoming  volume,  will  be  found  variants  of  many 
widely  distributed  popular  tales. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


14 


MR.  RED  WAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Fourth  Edition^  neidy  revised,  in  demy  8vo,  with  Illustrative  Plates. 
Price  Is. 


The  Handbook  of  Palmistry, 


AUTHOE  OP  "indications  OF  CHAEACTEE  IN  HANDWEITING." 

"  It  possesses  a  certain  literary  interest,  for  Miss  Baughan  shows  the  con- 
nection between  palmistry  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Kahbala." — Oraphic. 

"  Miss  Rosa  Baughan,  for  many  years  known  as  one  of  the  most  expert 
proficients  in  this  branch  of  science,  has  as  much  claim  to  consideration  as  any 
writer  on  the  subject." — Sussex  Daily  News. 

"People  who  wish  to  believe  in  palmistry,  or  the  science  of  reading 
character  from  the  marks  of  the  hand,"  says  the  Daily  Neivs,  in  an  article 
devoted  to  the  discussion  of  this  topic,  "  will  be  interested  in  a  handbook  of 
the  subject  by  Miss  Baughan,  published  by  Mr.  Red  way." 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN, 


BY 


ROSA  BAUGHAN, 


Just  ready,  in  2  vols.,  cloth,  2\s. 


Curate's 


A  NOVEL. 


BY 


J.    E.    PANT  ON, 


Autlior  of  "Sketches  in  Black  and  White," 
Less  than  Kin,"  &c. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAYS  PUBLICATIONS. 


15 


In  preparation. 
Price  to  Subscriber 8 j  <£1. 

Park's  History  and  Topography 
of  Hampstead. 

Eevised  and  brought  down  to  the  Present  Time. 

BY 

EDWARD    WALPORD,  M.A., 

Editor  of  "  Walford's  Antiquarian." 

Send  for  Prospectus. 
aEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 
Demy  18mo,  cloth ^  uncut.    Price  2s. 


Wellerisms. 

SELECTED  FROM 

"  Pickwick*^  and  "  Master  Humphreys  Clock.^^ 

EDITED,  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION, 

BY 

CHARLES  KENT. 

**  Some  write  well,  but  he  v/rites  Waller." — I^pigram  on  Dickens. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 


16 


MR.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


In  Prej)aration. 

The  Life  and  the  Substance  of  the  Teachings  of 
PhiHpp  Theophrastus,  Bombast  of  Hohenheim, 

KNOWN  BY  THE  NAME  OF 

Paracelsus, 

An  Adept  of  the  Secret  Science, 

Containing  his  essential  doctrines  in  regard  to  Cosmology, 
Pneumatology,  Magic,  Medicine,  Alchemy,  Theosophy,  and 
Philosophy,  and  some  important  secrets,  such  as  the  preparation 
of  the  true  Elixir  of  Life,  the  Electro-Magicon,  the  generation 
of  Homunculi,  the  nature  of  Elemental  Spirits,  &c. 
Extracted  and  translated  from  his  extensive  works  and  from 
some  unpublished  Manuscripts,  and  supplied  with 
Annotations,  by 

P.   HARTMANN,  M.D., 

AUTHOR  OP  "  MAGIC,"  ETC. 


GEOEaE  EEDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 

64  jf>p.,  8t;o,  wrapper.    Price  Is.  6cl. 
The 

Occult   World  Phenomena," 

AND 

Tbe  Society  for  Psychical  Research. 

BY 

A.  P.  SINNETT, 

AUTHOR  OP  **  THE  OCCULT  WORLD,"  **  ESOTERIC  BUDDHISM,"  ETC. 

With  a  Protest  by  Madame  Blavatsky. 

"  An  interesting  addition  to  the  fast-expanding  literature  of  Theosophy.'* 
— Literary  World. 

"  All  who  are  interested  in  Theosophy  should  read  it." — Glasgow  Serald. 

"  Mr.  Sinnett  scores  some  points  against  his  adversary,  and  his  pamphlet 
is  to  be  followed  by  some  memoirs  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  which  may  contain 
further  refutations.  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  appends  to  the  pamphlet  a 
brief  and  indignant  denial  of  the  grave  charges  which  have  been  made  against 
her." —  Grajphic. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS 


17 


In  croim  8«;o,  parchment.    Price  3s.  6d. 

The 

Anatomy  of  Tobacco; 

Or,  Smoking  Methodised,  Divided  and  Considered  after 
a  New  Fashion. 

BY 

LEOLINUS  SILURIENSIS. 


"  A  very  clever  and  amusing  parody  of  the  metaphysical  treatises  once 
in  fashion.  Every  smoker  will  be  pleased  with  this  volume." — Notes  and 
Queries. 

"  We  have  here  a  most  excellent  piece  of  fooling,  evidently  from  a  Univer- 
sity pen  ....  contains  some  very  clever  burlesques  of  classical  modes  of 
wxiting,  and  a  delicious  parody  of  scholastic  logic." — Literary  World. 

**  A  delightful  mock  essay  on  the  exoteric  philosophy  of  the  pipe  and  the 
pipe  bowl  ....  remindiug  one  alternately  of  *  Melancholy'  Burton  and  Herr 
Teufelsdroch,  and  implying  vast  reading  and  out-of-the-way  culture  on  the 
part  of  the  author." — Bookseller. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


In  demy  8vo,  with  Illustrative  Plates.     Price  Is. 

Chirognomancy ; 

Or,  Indications  of  Temperament  and  Aptitudes  Manifested  by 
tlie  Form  and  Texture  of  the  Thumb  and  Fingers. 

BY 

ROSA  BAUGHAN. 


"  Miss  Baughan  has  already  established  her  fame  as  a  writer  upon  occult 
subjects,  and  what  she  has  to  say  is  so  very  clear  and  so  easily  verified  that  it 
comes  with  the  weight  of  authority." — Lady's  Fictorial. 

"  Ingenious  and  not  uninteresting." — The  Queen. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN 


18 


ME.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Annual  suhscrijption^  payable  in  advance,  post  free,  bs. 


The  East  Anglian; 


OR, 


Notes  and  Queries 


ON  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  COUNTIES  OF  SUFFOLK, 
CAMBRIDGE,  ESSEX,  AND  NORFOLK. 

Issued  Monthly. 


Rev.  C  H.  EVELYN  WHITE,  F.R  Hist.S.,  Ipswich, 


HONOEAEY    SECRETAEY   OF   THE    SUFFOLK  INSTITIJTB  OF  ABCH^OLOGY  AND 
NATURAL  HISTOEY. 


"  Antiquities  are  history  defaced,  or  remnants  that  have  escaped  the  ship- 
wreck of  time  ....  wrecks  of  history  wherein  the  memory  of  things  is  almost 
lost;  or  such  particulars  as  industrious  persons,  with  exact  and  scrupulous 
diligence  can  anyway  collect  from  genealogies,  calendars,  titles,  inscriptions, 
monuments,  coins,  names,  etymologies,  proverbs,  traditions,  archives,  instru- 
ments, fragments  of  private  and  public  history,  scattered  passages,  of  books  no 
way  historical,  &c.,  by  which  means  something  is  recovered  frOm  the  deluge  of 

time  In  this  imperfect  history  no  deficiency  need  be  noted,  it  being  of 

its  own  nature  imperfect." — Lord  Bacon,  Advancement  of  Learning. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 


NEW  NOVEL  BY  ME.  A.  P.  SINNETT, 
Author  of  "Karma/*  &c. 


Just  published.    In  2  vols.f  crown  Svo,  cloth.    Price  2l3. 


EDITED  BY  THE 


BY 


A.  P.  SINNETT. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


19 


In  preparation. 

THE  PLAYS  OF  GEORGE  COLMAN  THE  YOUNGER. 

The  Comedies  and  Farces 

OF 

GEORaE  COLMAN  THE  YOUNOEK. 

Now  first  collected  and  carefully  reprinted  from  the  Original 
Editions,  with  Annotations  and  Critical  and 
Bibliographical  Preface, 

BY 

RICHARD  HERNE  SHEPHERD. 

In  Ttvo  Volumes. 

"  Mr.  R.  H.  Shepherd  is  engaged  in  collecting  and  reprinting,  with  a 
critical  and  biographical  introduction  and  annotations,  the  dramatic  works  of 
George  Colman  the  younger,  which  will  shortly  be  published  in  two  volumes 
by  Mr.  Redway,  of  York  Street.  Most  of  them  were  issued  in  Colman's  life- 
time in  pamphlet  form,  but  many  have,  nevertheless,  become  scarce,  and  of 
those  which,  like  the  '  Heir-at-Law,'  '  John  Bull,'  and  '  The  Poor  Gentleman' 
have  held  the  stage,  the  text  has  become  more  or  less  corrupted.  Considering 
the  great  popularity  of  Colman's  plays,  the  spirit  and  humour  of  their  scenes, 
and  their  association  with  the  names  of  great  actors  in  the  past,  it  is  a  curious 
fact  that  Mr.  Shepherd's  publication,  though  it  appears  more  than  a  century 
after  the  production  of  the  earliest  of  Colman's  pieces  on  the  stage,  will  be  the 
first  collected  edition.  It  will  comprise,  of  course,  the  suppressed  preface  to 
*  The  Iron  Chest,'  in  which  Colman  made  his  famous  personal  attack  upon 
John  Kemble." — Daily  News. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


20 


MR.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


An  edition  de  luxe,  in  demy  18mo.    Price  Is. 

Confessions  of  an  English 
Hachish  Eater. 

"  There  is  a  sort  of  bizarre  attraction  in  this  fantastic  little  book,  with  its 
weird,  unhealthy  imaginations.'* — Whitehall  Eevietv. 

"  Imagination  or  some  other  faculty  plays  marvellous  freaks  in  this  little 
book." — Lloyd's  WeeTcly- 

"  A  charmingly  written  and  not  less  charmingly  printed  little  volume.  The 
anonymous  author  describes  his  experiences  in  language  which  for  picturesque- 
ness  is  worthy  to  rank  with  De  Quincey's  celebrated  sketch  of  the  English 
Opium  Eater." — Lincolnshire  Chronicle. 

"A  weird  little  book  ....  The  author  seems  to  have  been  delighted  with 
his  dreams,  and  ....  carefully  explains  how  hachish  may  be  made  from  the 
resin  of  the  common  hemp  plant." — Daily  Chronicle. 

"  To  be  added  to  the  literature  of  what  is,  after  all,  a  very  undesirable 
subject.  Weak  minds  may  generate  a  morbid  curiosity  if  stimulated  in  this 
direction — Bradford  Observer. 

"  The  stories  told  by  our  author  have  a  decidedly  Oriental  flavour,  and  we 
would  not  be  surprised  if  some  foolish  individuals  did  endeavour  to  procure 
some  of  the  drug,  with  a  view  to  experience  the  sensation  described  by  the 
writer  of  this  clever  brochure'^ — Edinburgh  Courant. 


GEOEGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


Mo7ithly,  One  Shilling, 

Walford's  Antiquarian: 

A  Magazine  and  Bibliograpliical  Eeview. 

EDITED  BY 

EDWARD   WALFORD,  M.A. 

Volumes  I.  to  VIII.,  Now  Beady,  jprice  8s.  Qd.  each. 


"  The  excellent  archajological  monthly." — CasselVs  Art  and  Literature. 

"  This  magazine  is  dear  to  the  hearts  of  the  lovers  of  antiquities.  The 
meetings  of  the  various  learned  societies  are  also  described  ....  and  a  number 
articles  of  both  antiquarian  and  bibliographical  interest." — Nonconformist. 

"  There  is  not  much  in  Walford's  Antiquarian  that  any  connoisseur  in 
literary  curiosities  would  care  to  pass  over." — St.  James's  Gazette. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


ME.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


21 


Monthly,  2s. ;  Yearly  Subscription ,  20s. 

The  Theosophist. 

A  Magazine   of  Oriental  Philosophy,   Art,  Literature,  and 
Occultism. 

CONDUCTED  BY 

H.  P.  BLAVATSKY. 

Vols.  I.  to  VI.  Now  Ready, 


"Theosophy  has  suddenly  risen  to  importance  The  movement 

implied  by  the  term  Theosophy  is  one  that  cannot  be  adequately  explained  in 
a  few  words  ....  those  interested  in  the  movement,  which  is  not  to  be 
confounded  with  spiritualism,  will  lind  means  of  gratifying  their  curiosity  hy 
procuring  the  back  numbers  of  The  Theosophist  and  a  very  remarkable  Ijook 
called  Isis  Unveiled,  by  Madame  Blavatsky." — Literary  World. 


GEOKQE  EEDWAY,  YOEK  STEEET,  COVENT  GAEDEN. 


NEW  WOEK  BY  JOHN  H.  INGRAM. 


The  Raven. 

BY 

EDGAR   ALLAN  POE. 

With  Historical  and  Literary  Commentary.  By  John  H.  Ingram. 
Crown  8vo,  parchment,  gilt  top,  uncut,  price  Qs. 

"  This  is  an  interesting  monograph  on  Poe's  famous  poem.  First  comes 
the  poet's  own  account  of  the  genesis  of  the  poem,  with  a  criticism,  in  which 
Mr.  Ingi*am  declines,  very  properly,  we  think,  to  accept  the  history  as  entirely 
genuine.  Much  curious  information  is  collected  in  this  essay.  Then  follows 
the  poem  itself,  with  the  various  readings,  and  then  its  after-history ;  and  after 
these  '  Isadore,'  by  Albert  Pike,  a  composition  which  undoubtedly  suggested 
the  idea  of  *  The  Eaven'  to  its  author.  Several  translations  are  given,  two  in 
French,  one  in  prose,  the  other  in  rhymed  verse ;  besides  extracts  from  others, 
two  in  German  and  one  in  Latin.  But  perhaps  the  most  interesting  chapter 
in  the  book  is  that  on  the  '  Fabrications.'" — The  Spectator. 

"  There  is  no  more  reliable  authority  on  the  subject  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe  than 
Mr.  John  H.  Ingram  ....  the  volume  is  well  printed  and  tastefully  bound 
in  spotless  vellum,  and  will  prove  to  be  a  work  of  the  greatest  interest  to  all 
students  of  English  and  American  literature." — The  Publisher's  Circular. 


GEOEGE  EEDWAY,  YOEK  STEEET,  COVENT  GAEDEN, 


22 


ME.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Now  ready f  at  all  Booksellers',  and  at  Smithes  Railway  Bookstalls. 
Popular  Edition,  price  2s.  6d. 

Burma : 

AS  IT  WAS,  AS  IT  IS,  AND  AS  IT  WILL  BE. 

BY 

J.    G.  SCOTT. 

Crown  8vo,  clotli. 


"  Before  going  to  help  to  govern  them,  Mr.  Scott  has  once  more  written  on 
the  Burmese  ....  Mr.  Scott  claims  to  have  covered  the  whole  ground,  to 
show  Burma  as  it  was,  is,  and  will  be ;  and  as  there  is  nobody  competent  to 
criticise  him  except  himself,  we  shall  not  presume  to  say  how  far  he  has  suc- 
ceeded. What,  however,  may  be  asserted  with  absolute  confidence  is,  that  he 
has  written  a  bright,  readable,  -and  useful  book." — Saturday/  EevieWy 
March  27- 

"  Very  lively  and  readable." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  The  author  knows  what  he  writes  about." — St,  Stephen's  Review. 

"  There  is  a  good  deal  of  curious  reading  in  the  book." — Literary  World. 

"  The  book  is  amusing  and  instructing,  and  Mr.  George  Redway,  the 
publisher,  will  have  done  the  public  and  himself  a  service." — Court  Journal. 

"  The  print  is  clear,  and  the  binding  in  excellent  taste." — JBooTcseller, 

"  Evidently  full  of  genuine  information." — Society. 

"A  handy  guide  to  Burjna,  as  readable  as  it  is  accurate." — Glole. 

"  Mr.  Scott  should  have  called  this  volume  *  A  book  for  Members  of  Parlia- 
ment.' " — London  and  China  Telegraph. 

"  The  sketch  of  Burmese  cosmogony  and  mythology  is  very  interesting." — 
Nature. 

"  A  competent  historian.  He  sketches  Burma  and  the  Burmans  with  minute 
fidelity." — Daily  Chronicle. 

"  Probably  no  Englishman  knows  Burma  better  than  Mr.  J.  G.  Scott." — 
Contemporary  Review. 

"  An  excellent  description  both  of  land  and  people." —  Contemporary  Peview 
"  Most  interesting.'^ — St.  James's  Gazette. 

"  Shway  yoe  is  a  graphic  writer  ....  no  one  can  supply  this  information 
better  than  Mr.  Scott.'*— Asiatic  Quarterly  Revieio. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 


ME.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


23 


Just  'published^  handsomely  'printed  and  tastefully  hound,  436  jpages 
large  crown  Svo,  cloth  extra,  7s.  6d. 

Essays  in  the  Study  of  Folk- 
Songs. 

BY  THE 

COUNTESS  EVELYN  MARTINENGO-CESARESCO. 


"  A  pleasant  volume  on  a  pleasant  topic  The  Countess,  with  her 

sincere  enthusiasm  for  what  is  simple,  passionate,  and  sensuous  in  folk-song, 
and  with  her  lucid  and  unaffected  style,  well  understands  the  mode  in  which 
the  educated  collector  should  approach  the  shy  singers  or  story-tellers  of 

Europe  Her  introduction  is  perhaps,  to  the  scientific  student  of  popular 

culture,  the  best  part  of  her  book.  .  .  .  ,  Next  to  her  introduction,  perhaps 
her  article  on  *  Death  in  Folk- Poetry'  is  the  most  serviceable  essay  in  the 

volume  *  Folk  Lullabies'  is  perhaps  the  most  pleasant  of  the  remaining 

essays  in  the  admirable  volume,  a  volume  remarkable  for  knowledge,  sympathy, 
and  good  taste." — Extracts  from  a  page  notice  in  the  Saturday  Heview, 
AprU  24,  1886. 

"This  is  a  very  delightful  book,  full  of  information  and  thoughtful  sugges- 
tions. It  deals  principally  with  the  Folk-songs  of  Southern  peoples,  Venetian, 
Sicilian,  Armenian,  Provence,  and  Greek  Songs  of  Calabria,  but  there  are 
several  essays  devoted  to  the  general  characteristics  of  Folk-Poetry,  such  as 
the  influence  of  Nature,  the  Inspiration  of  Death,  the  idea  of  fate,  the  nume- 
rous songs  connected  with  the  rites  of  May,  Folk-Lullabies,  and  Folk-Dirges. 
There  is  also  an  interesting  essay  on  what  is  called  the  White  Paternoster  and 
Children's  Khyming  Prayers.  This  is  one  of  the  most  valuable,  and  certainly 
one  of  the  most  interesting,  books  which  has  been  written  on  a  subject  which 
has  of  late  years  been  exciting  an  ever-increasing  attention,  and  which  in- 
volves many  important  problems  connected  with  the  early  history  of  the 
human  race." — Standard. 

" '  Folk-Songs,'  traditional  popular  ballads,  are  as  tempting  to  me  as 
King  Charles's  head  to  Mr.  Dick.  But  interesting  as  the  topic  of  the  origin 
and  diffusion  and  literary  merit  of  these  poems  may  be — poems  much  the  same 
in  all  European  countries — they  are  rather  caviare  to  the  general.  The  Countess 
Martinengo-Cesaresco  is,  or  should  be,  a  well-known  authority  among  special 
students  of  this  branch  of  literature,  to  whom  I  heartily  commend  her 
Essays  in  the  Study  of  Folk-Songs.'  The  Countess  is,  perhaps,  most 
familiar  with  Southern  volksleider,  as  of  Greece,  Italy,  and  Sicily.  Her  book 
is  a  treasure  house  of  Folk-lore  of  various  kinds,  and  the  matter  is  handled 
with  much  poetic  appreciation  and  a  good  deal  of  learning." — Daili/  News. 

"  A  kind  of  popular  inti'oduction  to  the  study  of  Folk-lore." — St.  James's 
Gazette. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVEXT  GA.RDEN, 


24 


ME.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


EBENEZER  JONES'S  POEMS 


In  post  8vOj  cloth,  old  style.    Price  5s. 

Studies  of  Sensation  and  Event. 

Poems  by  Ebenezer  Jones. 
Edited,  Prefaced,  and  Annotated  by  Eichaed  Herne  Shepherd. 
With  Memorial  Notices  of  the  Author  by  Sumner  Jones 
and  W.  J.  Linton. 
A  new  Edition.    With  Photographic  Portrait  of  the  Poet. 


"This  remarkable  poet  affords  nearly  the  most  striking  instanceof  neglected 
genius  in  our  modern  school  of  poetry.  His  poems  are  full  of  vivid  disorderly 
power." — D.  G.  Rossetti. 

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


In  demy  8vo,  elegantly  printed  on  Dutch  hand-made  pa/per^  and 
hound  in  parchment-paper  cover.    Price  Is. 

The  Scope  and  Charm  of 
Antiquarian  Study. 

BY 

JOHN   BATTY,  F.R.Hist.S., 

Member  OF  the  Yorkshiee  Archaeological  and  Topographical 
Association. 


"It  forms  a  useful  and  entertaining  guide  to  a  beginner  in  historical 
researches." — Notes  and  Queries. 

"  The  author  has  laid  it  before  the  public  in  a  most  inviting,  intelligent, 
and  intelligible  form,  and  offers  every  incentive  to  the  study  in  every  depart- 
ment, including  Ancient  Records,  Manorial  Court-Rolls,  Heraldry,  Painted 
Glass,  Mural  Paintings,  Pottery,  Church  Bells,  Numismatics,  Folk-Lore,  &c.,  to 
each  of  w^hich  the  attention  of  the  student  is  directed.  The  pamphlet  is  printed 
on  a  beautiful  modern  antique  paper,  appropriate  to  the  subject  of  the  work." — 
Brighton  Examiner. 

"  Mr.  Batty,  who  is  one  of  those  folks  Mr.  Dobson  styles  *  gleaners  after 
time,'  has  clearly  and  concisely  summed  up,  in  the  space  of  a  few  pages,  all  the 
various  objects  which  may  legitimately  be  considered  to  come  within  the  scope 
of  antiquarian  study." — Academy. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


25 


A  few  large  'paper  copies,  with  India  proof  portrait  ^  in  imperial  Svo, 
parchment.    Price  7s.  6d. 

An 

Essay  on  the  Genius  of  George 
Cruik  shank. 


BY 

"THETA"  (WILLIAM  MAKEPEACE  THACKERAY). 

With  all  the  Original  Woodcut  Illustrations,  a  New  Portrait 
of  Crtjikshank,  etched  by  Pailthorpe,  and  a  Prefatory  Note 
on  Thackeray  as  an  Art  Critic,  by  W.  E.  Church,  Secretary 
of  the  Urban  Club. 


"  Thackeray's  essay  *  On  the  Genius  of  George  Cruikshank,'  reprinted  from 
the  Westminster  Revieio,  is  a  piece  of  work  well  calculated  to  drive  a  critic  of 
these  days  to  despair.  How  inimitable  is  its  touch !  At  once  familiar  and 
elegant,  serious  and  humorous,  enthusiastically  appreciative,  and  yet  just  and 
clear-sighted ;  butt  above  all,  what  the  French  call  personnel.  It  is  not  the 
impersonnel  reviewer  who  is  going  through  his  paces  ....  it  is  Thackeray 
talking  to  us  as  few  can  talk — talking  with  apparent  carelessness,  even  ram- 
blingly,  but  never  losing  the  thread  of  his  discourse  or  saying  a  word  too  much, 
nor  ever  missing  a  point  which  may  help  to  elucidate  his  subject  or  enhance 

the  charm  of  his  essay  Mr.   W.  E.  Church's  prefatory  note  on 

*  Thackeray  as  an  Art  Critic' is  interesting  and  carefully  compiled." — West- 
minster  Review ^  Jan.  15th. 

"As  the  original  copy  of  the  Westminster  is  now  excessively  rare,  thi3 
re-issue  will,  no  doubt,  be  welcomed  by  collectors." — Birmingham  Daily 
Mail. 

*'  Not  only  on  account  of  the  author,  but  of  the  object,  we  must  welcome 
most  cordially  this  production.  Every  bookman  knows  Thackeray,  and  will 
be  glad  to  have  this  production  of  his  which  deals  witli  art  criticism — a  subject 
so  peculiarly  Thackeray's  own." — The  Antiquary. 

"  It  was  a  pleasant  and  not  untimely  act  to  reprint  this  well-known  delight- 
ful essay  .  .  .  the  artist  could  have  found  no  other  commentator  so  sympathetic 

and  discriminating  The  new  portrait  of  Cruikshank  by  F.  W.  Pailthorpe 

is  a  clear,  firm  etching." — The  Artist. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


26 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Edition  limited  to  500  copies,  handsomely  printed  on  antique  paper 
and  tastefully  hound.    Price  7s.  6d. 

THE  ASTROLOGER'S  GUIDE. 

Anima  Astrologiae; 

OR,  A 

Guide  for  Astrologers, 

Being  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty-six  Considerations  of  the 
Astrologer,  Guido  Bonatus,  translated  from  the  Latin  by 
Henry  Coley,  together  with  the  choicest  Aphorisms  of  the 
Seven  Segments  of  Jerom  Cardan,  of  Milan,  edited  by 
William  Lilly  (1675) ;  now  first  republished  from  the  original 
edition  with  Notes  and  Preface 


WILLIAM  CHARLES  ELDOW  SERJEANT, 

FELLOW  OP  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY. 


"  A  work  most  useful  aud  necessary  for  all  students,  and  recommended  as 
such  to  the  sons  of  Art." — William  Lilly. 


G-EORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 
In  the  Press. 

Memoirs  of  Madame 
Blavatsky, 

Compiled  from  Materials  supplied  by  Members  of  her  Family 
and  Intimate  Friends, 

AND  EDITED  BY 

A.    P.  SINNETT. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  OOVENT  GARDEN. 


ME.  EEDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


27 


Quarterly,  Is.  Qd.    Annual  subscription,  5s. 

Northamptonshire    Notes  and 
Queries. 

An  illustrated  quarterly  journal  devoted  to  the  Antiquities, 
Family  History,  Traditions,  Parochial  Eecords,  Folk- 
Lore,  Ancient  Customs,  &c.,  of  the  County. 

EDITED  BY 

The    Rev.    W.    D.    SWEETING,  M.A. 

GEORaE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN". 
In  preparation. 

The  Substance  of  the  Writings 
of  Eliphas  Levi. 

TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED  BY 

ARTHUR    EDWARD  WAITE. 

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 
Nearly  ready. 

Low  Down. 

POEMS 

BY 

TWO  TRAMPS. 

The  tattered  appearance  a,nd  the  typographical  eccentricities 
of  the  volume  are  attributable  to  the  circumstances  under  which 
the  "  two  tramps"  got  their  book  printed. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVE  NT  GARDEN, 


28 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


In  crown  8vOj  cloth.     Price  7s.  6d. 

Theosophy,  Religion,  and 
Occult  Science. 

BY 

HENRY   S.  OLCOTT, 

PEESIDENT  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY. 

WITH  GLOSSARY  OF  INDIAN  TERMS  AND  INDEX. 


"  This  book,  to  which  we  can  only  allot  an  amount  of  space  quite  incom- 
mensurate with  its  intrinsic  interest,  is  one  that  will  appeal  to  the  prepared 
student  rather  than  to  the  general  reader.  To  any  one  who  has  previously 
made  the  acquaintance  of  such  books  as  Mr.  Sinnett's  *  Occult  World,'  and 

*  Esoteric  Buddhism,*  or  has  in  other  ways  familiarised  himself  with  the 
doctrines  of  the  so-called  Theosophical  Society  or  Brotherhood,  these  lectures 
of  Colonel  Olcott's  will  be  rich  in  interest  and  suggestiveness.  The  American 
officer  is  a  person  of  undoubted  social  position  and  unblemished  personal 
reputation,  and  his  main  object  is  not  to  secure  belief  in  the  reality  of  any 

*  phenomena,'  not  to  win  a  barren  reputation  for  himself  as  a  thaumaturgist  or 
wonder-worker,  but  to  win  acceptance  for  one  of  the  oldest  philosophies  of 
nature  and  human  life — a  philosophy  to  which  of  late  years  the  thinkers  of  the 
West  have  been  turning  with  noteworthy  curiosity  and  interest.  Of  course, 
should  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  in  question  he  satisfactorily  estab- 
lished, there  would  undoubtedly  be  proof  that  the  Eastern  sages  to  whom 
Colonel  Olcott  bears  witness  do  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  physical 
universe  far  wider  and  more  intimate  than  that  which  has  been  laboriously 
acquired  by  the  inductive  science  of  the  West ;  but  the  theosophy  expounded 
in  this  volume  is  at  once  a  theology,  a  metaphysic,  and  a  sociology,  in  which 
mere  marvels,  as  such,  occupy  a  quite  subordinate  and  unimportant  position. 
We  cannot  now  discuss  its  claims,  and  we  will  not  pronounce  any  opinion  upon 
them;  we  will  only  say  that  Colonel  Olcott's  volume  deserves  and  will  repay 
the  study  of  all  readers  for  whom  the  bye- ways  of  speculation  have  an 
irresistible  charm." — Manchester  Examiner. 


GEOEGE  RED  WAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


29 


Post  free,  'price  "dd. 

The  Literature  of  Occultism 
and  Archaeology. 

Being  a  Catalogue  of  Books  ON  SALE  relating  to 


Ancient  Worships. 

Astrology. 

Alchemy. 

Animal  Magnetism. 

Anthropology. 

Arabic. 

Assassins. 

Antiquities. 

Ancient  History. 

Behmen  and  the  Mystics. 

Buddhism. 

Clairvoyance. 

Cabeiri. 

China. 

Coins. 

Druids. 

Dreams  and  Visions. 

Divination. 

Divining  Eod. 

Demonology, 

Ethnology. 

Egypt. 

Fascination. 

Flagellants. 

Freemasonry. 

Folk-Lore. 

Gnostics. 

G-ems. 

Ghosts. 

Hindus.  [Writing. 
Hieroglyphics  and  Secret 
Herbals. 
Hermetic. 

India  and  the  Hindus. 

Kabbala. 

Koran. 

Miracles. 

Mirabilaries. 


Magic  and  Magicians. 

Mysteries. 

Mithraic  Worship, 

Mesmerism. 

Mythology. 

Metaphysics. 

Mysticism. 

Neo-platonism. 

Orientalia. 

Obelisks. 

Oracles. 

Occult  Sciences. 

Philology. 

Persian. 

Par  sees. 

Philosophy. 

Physiognomy. 

Palmistry  and  Handwriting. 

Phrenology. 

Psychoneurology. 

Psychometry. 

Prophets. 

Eosicrucians. 

Eound  Towers. 

Eabbinical. 

Spiritualism.      [and  Quakers. 

Skeptics,  Jesuits,  Christians, 

Sibylls. 

Symbolism. 

Serpent  Worship. 

Secret  Societies. 

Somnambulism. 

Travels. 

Tombs. 

Theosophical. 

Theology  and  Criticism. 

Witchcraft. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


30 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


To  he  published  shortly^  handsomely  jprinted  and  hound  in  one  vol. 
Small  demy  8vo,  jprice  10s.  6cZ. 
Now  offered  to  Subscribers  at  1%.  net. 

The  Kabala  Denudata 

(Translated  into  English), 

CONTAINING  THE  FOLLOWING  BOOKS  OF  THE  ZOHAR :  

1.  T'he  Book  of  Concealed  Mystery, 

2.  The  Greater  Holy  Assembly. 

3.  The  Lesser  Holy  Assembly, 

Collated  with  the  original  Hebrew  and  the  Latin  text  of  Knorr 
de  Eosenroth's  "  Kabala  Denudata," 

BY 

S.   LIDDELL   MACGREGOR  MATHERS. 

1^  Send  for  Prospectus. 


GEORaE  RED  WAY,  YORK  STREET,  CO  VENT  GARDEN. 


In  demy  8i;o,  wrappered,  uncut  for  binding,  with  Extra  Portrait, 
Frice  5s, 

'^Phiz"  (Hablot  Knight  Browne): 

A  Memoir  3  including  a  Selection  from  his  Correspondence  and 
Notes  on  his  Principal  "Works.    By  Feed.  G.  Kitton. 
With  a  Portrait  and  numerous  Illustrations, 

A  few  copies  only  remain. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


31 


1  vol.,  crown  Svo,  4<00  pages,  6s. 

A  Regular  Pickle: 

How  He  Sowed  his  Wild  Oats, 

BY 

HENRY  W.  NESPIELD. 


**  Mr.  Nesfield's  name  as  an  author  is  established  on  such  a  pleasantly  sound 
foundation  that  it  is  a  recognised  fact  that,  in  taking  up  a  book  written  by  him, 
the  reader  is  in  for  a  delightful  half-hour,  during  which  his  I'isible  and  humour- 
ous faculties  will  be  pleasantly  stimulated.  The  history  of  young  Archibald 
Highton  Tregauntly,  whose  fortunes  we  follow  from  the  cradle  to  when  expe- 
rience is  just  beginning  to  teach  him  a  few  wholesome  lessons,  is  as  smart  and 
brisk  as  it  is  possible  to  be." — Whitehall  Review. 

"  It  will  be  matter  for  regret  if  the  brisk  and  lively  style  of  Mr.  Nesfield, 
who  at  times  reminds  us  of  Levee,  should  blind  people  to  the  downright 
wickedness  of  such  a  perverted  career  as  is  here  described." — Daily  Chronicle, 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


In  post  8vo,  with  numerous  plates  coloured  hy  hand. 

Geometrical  Psychology; 

OR, 

The  Science  of  Representation. 
Being  the  Theories  and  Diagrams  of  B.  W.  Betts 

EXPLAINED  BY 

LOUISA    S.  COOK. 


"  His  attempt  (B.  W.  Betts')  seems  to  have  taken  a  similar  direction  to 
that  of  George  Boole  in  logic,  with  the  difference  that,  whereas  Boole's  expres- 
sion of  the  Laws  of  Thought  is  algebraic,  Betts  expresses  mind-growth  geome- 
trically ;  that  is  to  say,  his  growth-formulae  are  expressed  in  numerical  series, 
of  which  each  can  be  pictured  to  the  eye  in  a  corresponding  curve.  When  the 
series  are  thus  represented,  they  are  found  to  resemble  the  forms  of  leaves  and 
flowers." — 'Extract  from  "  Symholic  Methods  of  Study,"  by  Mary  Boole. 


GEORGE   REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


32 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


NEW     REAT.  ISTIC  NOVEL, 
620  jpages,  handsomely  hound.    Price  Qs. 

Leicester : 

AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

BY 

FRANCIS    W.    L.  ADAMS. 


"  Even  M.  Zola  and  Mr.  George  Moore  would  find  it  hard  to  beat  Mr. 
Adams's  description  of  Rosy's  death.  The  grimly  minute  narrative  of  Leicester's 
schoolboy  troubles  and  of  his  attempt  to  get  a  living  when  he  is  discarded 
by  his  guardian  is,  too,  of  such  a  character  as  to  make  one  regret  that  Mr. 
Adams  had  not  put  to  better  use  his  undoubted,  though  undisciplined, 
powers." — The  Academy. 

"  There  is  unquestionable  power  in  *  Leicester.' " — The  Athenceum. 

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 
In  post  4^0.     Illustrated  with  Engravings  on  Wood. 

ASTROLOGY  THEOLOGIZED. 

The  Spiritual  Hermeneutics  of 
Astrology  and  Holy  Writ, 

BEING 

Treatise  upon  the  Influence  of  the  Stars  on  Man^ 

and  on  the  Art  of  Ruling  them  by  the 

Law  of  Grace, 

Ekprinted  from  the  Original  of  1649. 

With  a  Prefatory  Essay  on  tiie  True  Method  of  Interrogating 
Holy  Scripture. 

BY 

ANNA  KINGSPORD 

(Doctor  of  Medicine  of  the  Paris  Faculty). 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


33 


Small  4tOf  with  Illustrations,  hound  in  vegetable  parchment. 
Price  10s.  6d. 

The 

Virgin  of  the  World. 

BY 

HERMES   MERCURIUS  TRISMEGISTUS. 

A  Treatise  on  INITIATIONS,  or  ASCLEPIOS ;  the  DEPI- 
NITIONS  of  ASCLEPIOS ;  FRAGMENTS  of  the 
WRITINGS  OF  HERMES. 

TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED  BY  THE  AUTHOKS  OF  "  THE  PERFECT 
WAY." 

With  an  introduction  to  "  The  Virgin  of  the  World"  by  A.  K., 
and  an  Essay  on  "  The  Hermetic  Books"  by  E.  M. 


"  It  will  be  a  most  interesting  study  for  every  occultist  to  compare  the 
doctrines  of  the  ancient  Hermetic  philosophy  with  the  teaching  of  the  Vedantic 
and  Buddhist  systems  of  religious  thought.  The  famous  books  of  Hermes 
seem  to  occupy,  with  reference  to  the  Egyptian  religion,  the  same  position 
which  the  Upanishads  occupy  in  Aryan  religious  literature." — The  TheosopMst, 
November,  1885. 

aEORGE  RED  WAY,  YORK  STREET,  CO  VENT  GARDEN. 


The  Path: 

A  magazine  devoted  to  the  Brotherhood  of  Humanity,  Theosophy 
in  America,  and  the  Study  of  Occult  Science,  Philosophy, 
and  Aryan  literature. 

EDITED  BY 

WILLIAM  Q.  JUDGE. 

(Published  under  the  auspices  of  The  Aryan  Theosophical 
Society  of  New  York.) 

Monthly,    Subscription,  10s.  per  annum. 


aEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


34 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


In  preparation. 


Sea  Songs  and  River  Rhymes. 


j4  Selection  of  English  Verse^  from  Chaucer  to  Swinhurne. 


EDITED  BY 


Mrs.   DAVENPORT  ADAMS. 


With  Etchings  by  Mackaness. 


This  is  a  Collection  of  Poems  and  Passages  by  English 
Wiriters  on  the  subject  of  the  Sea  and  Rivers,  and  covers  the 
whole  of  the  ground  between  Spenser  and  Tennyson.  It  includes 
numerous  copyright  Poems,  for  the  reproduction  of  which  the 
.author  and  publishers  have  given  their  permission. 

"  Mrs.  W.  Davenport  Adams,  who  has  produced  many  charming  volumes 
.of  verse,  has  nearly  ready  "  Sea  Songs  and  River  Rhymes."  Mrs.  Adams  is 
-sure  to  prepare  an  interesting  work,  for  she  displays  considerable  industry, 
(Coupled  with  sound  scholarship  and  a  cultivated  taste. —  WaJcffield  Free  Press. 


aEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MEWLY-DISOOVEEED  POEM  BY  CHARLES  LAMB. 


A  Rough  Outside  with  a  Gentle  Heart, 

By  Chaeles  Lamb.    Now  first  reprinted  from  the  Original 
Edition  of  1811,  with  Preface  and  Notes 


Fcajp.  8^0,  printed  on  handsome  paper  at  the  Chisidch  Press,  and 
bound  in  parchment  hy  Burn  to  form  a  companion  volume  to 
"  Tamerlane.''*    Price  \Qs.  Qd. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


BY 


mCHARD    HERNE  SHEPHERD. 


Only  100  Copies  Printed. 


MR.  RED  WAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


35 


In  small  8vo,  handsomely  printed  on  antiqiie  paper,  and  tastefully 
hound.    Price  2s.  6d. 

Pope  Joan 

(THE  FEMALE  POPE). 

A  Historiccil  Study.    Translated  from  tlie  Greek  of  Emmanuel 
Ehoidis,  with  Preface  by 

CHARLES  HASTINGS  COLLETTB. 

"  When  Dr.  Dollinger  wrote  to  the  effect  that  '  the  subject  of  Pope  Joan 
has  not  yet  lost  interest/  he  said  no  more  than  the  truth.  The  probability  is 
that  the  topic  will  always  have  its  attractions  for  the  lovers  of  the  curiosities 
of  history.  Mr.  Bariijg--Goul(l  has  declared  that  *  the  whole  story  of  Pope 
Joan  is  fabulous,  and  rests  on  not  a  single  historical  foundation;'  but  others 
arc  not  so  firmly  convinced  in  the  matter,  and  at  all  times  there  are  those 
who  are  anxious  to  investigate  singular  traditions.  To  the  two  latter  classes 
the  little  monograph  on  '  Pope  Joao,'  written  by  Emmanuel  Khoidis,  edited 
with  a  preface  by  Mr.  C.  H.  Collette,  and  published  by  Mr.  Redway,  will  be 
very  acceptable.  The  author  discusses  the  topic  with  much  learning  and 
ingenuity,  and  Mr.  Collettc's  introduction  is  full  of  information." — Globe. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


Sphinx: 

Monatsschrift  fiir  die  gesdiichtliche  und  experimentale  Begriin- 
dung  der  iibersinnliclien  Weltanscliauung  auf  monistischer 
Grundlage  lierausgegeben  von  Hubbe  Schleiden, 
Dr.  J.  U. 

Is.  monthly;  10s.  per  a^mum. 


"  We  cordially  recommend  this  magazine  to  all  those  of  our  readers  who 
are  acquainted  with  the  German  language,  as  it  promises  to  be  one  of  the  best 
extant  periodicals  treating  of  transcendental  subjects." — The  TJieosophist. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  rSTREET,  COVEXT  GARDEN. 


36 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


Transactions    of   the  London 


Nos.  1  and  2. — Out  of  print. 

No.  3. — On  tlie  Higher  Aspect  of  Theosophic  Studies.  By 

MoHiNi  M.  Chatteeji. 
No.  4. — A  Synopsis  of  Baron  Du   Prel's  "Philosophie  der 

Mystik."    By  Bertram  Keightley. 
No.  5» — A  Paper  on  Eeincarnation.     By  Miss  Arundale. 

And  other  Proceedings. 
No.  6, — The  Theosophical  Movement.    By  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett. 
No.  7.— The  Higher  Self.    By  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett. 

No.  8. — The  Theosophical  Society  and  its  Work.    By  Mohini 
M.  Chatterji. 

Nos.  3  to  8,  and  each  succeeding  number  as  issued,  may  be  had, 
price  One  Shilling. 

GEORaE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 


Society: 


Crown  ^vOf  cloth,  2s.  Qd. 


From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Day  of  Publication. 


BY 


T.   J.  NORTHY. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MR.  REDWAY'S  rUBLTCATIONS. 


37 


A  few  copies  only  remain  of  the  following  important  work,  hy  the 
author  of    The  Rosicrucians.'* 

Phallicism: 

Its  oonnexion  with  the  Rosicrucians  and  the  Gnostics,  and  its 
Foundation  in  Buddhism. 

BY 

HAR  GRAVE  JENNINGS, 

AUTHOR  OP  "the  ROSICEUCIANS." 

Demy  Svo,  cloth. 


"  Tliis  book  is  written  ad  clerumy  and  appeals  to  the  scholar  only,  and  not 
to  the  multitude.  It  is  a  masterly  and  exhaustive  account  of  that  worship  of 
the  creative  powers  of  nature  which,  under  various  names,  has  prevailed  among* 
all  the  nations  of  antiquity  and  of  mediseval  times,  alike  in  Egypt  and  India, 
in  Italy  and  Gaul,  among  the  Israelites  of  old,  and  among  the  primitive 
inhabitants  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  ....  a  most  valuable  auxiliary  to 
all  who  care  to  pursue  such  a  subject  of  inquiry,  a  subject  for  which  Mr. 
Jennings  is  the  better  fitted  on  account  of  his  long  and  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  Rosicrucians,  their  tenets,  and  their  practices." — Antiquarian 
Magazine  and  Bihliographer. 

"Unpleasant  as  this  subject  is,  we  are  quite  prepared  to  agree  that  in  it. 
scientific  aspect,  as  a  form  of  human  worship,  it  has  considerable  importance 
i  .  .  .  .  Mr.  Jennings  deals  almost  entirely  with  the  subjective  part  of  his 
enquiry,  and  he  has  evidently  made  a  considerable  amount  of  research  into  the 

literature  of  early  religions  He  has  produced  something  which  is,  at 

all  events,  worth  the  attention  of  the  student  of  comparative  psychology.*' — 
Antiquary. 

"  This  book  ...  is  profoundly  learned,  and  gives  evidence  on  each  page 
of  deep  thought,  intense  powers  of  research,  clear  and  unmistakable  reasoning, 
and  thorough  mastership  of  the  subject.  The  appendix  also  contains  much 
very  curious  matter  which  will  interest  those  who  desire  to  study  the  subject 
under  all  its  different  aspects  and  bearings." — Beliquary. 


GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


38 


MR.  REDWAY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


544  pages,  crown  Sw,  green  cloth  hoards,  price  7s.  6d*    (Only  600 
copies  printed^) 


A  Bibliograplij  of  the  Literature  relating  to  Charles  Dickens 
and  his  Writings. 

Compiled  by  Fred,  G.  Kitton,  author  of  "  '  Phiz'  (Hablot  K. 
Browne),  a  Memoir,"  and  "  John  Leech,  Artist  and  Humourist." 
With  a  Portrait  of  "  Boz,"  from  a  Drawing  by  Samuel 
Laurence. 


"  This  book  is  honestly  what  it  pretends  to  be,  and  nothing  more.  It  is  a 
comprehensive  catalogue  of  all  the  writings  of  Mr.  Charles  Dickens,  and  of  a 
good  quantity  of  books  written  about  him.  It  also  contains  copious  extracts 
from  reviews  of  his  works  and  from  sermons  on  his  cliaracter.  The  criticisms 
are  so  various,  and  some  of  them  are  so  much  at  variance  with  others,  that  the 
reader  of  them  can  complain  of  nothing  less  than  a  lack  of  material  on  which 
to  form  his  judgment,  if  he  has  not  formed  it  already,  on  the  claim  of  Mr. 
Dickens  to  occupy  a  front  place  in  the  rank  of  English  classics.  Assertions, 
if  not  arguments,  are  multiplied  on  either  side." — Saturday  Revietv. 

"  Mr.  Kitton's  task  has  obviously  involved  much  labour  and  research,  and 
it  has,  on  the  whole,  been  very  ably  performed." — Scotsman. 

"  The  labour  involved  in  the  preparation  of  such  a  volume  is,  of  course, 
enormous,  but  all  Dickens  students  and  collectors  will  thank  Mr.  Kitton  for 
his  work.  The  volume  contains  a  finely-executed  portrait  of  Dickens,  from  a 
drawing  by  Samuel  Laurence." — Graphic. 

"It  is  a  very  full  and  delightful  book ;  for  open  it  at  any  page,  and  you  are 
almost  certain  to  come  upon  some  interesting  fact  or  fancy,  the  thought  of  a 
man  of  genius,  or  an  incident  bearing  on  a  memorable  life  and  its  work." — 
St.  James's  Gazette. 

"  A  great  deal  that  relates  in  numberless  ways  to  the  best  known  and  most 
loved  of  English  humourists  will  be  found  in  this  volume,  certainly  the  most 
comprehensive  that  has  yet  essayed  to  illustrate  his  popularity  from  every 
personal  and  critical  point  of  view." — Daily  Telegraph. 

*'  Mr.  Fred.  G.  Kitton  ....  has  done  his  work  with  remarkable  thorough, 
ness,  and  consequently  with  real  success.  It  is  a  subject  on  which  I  may 
fairly  claim  to  speak,  and  I  may  say  that  all  that  I  know,  and  a  great  deal  I  did 
not  know,  about  Dickens  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  Kitton's  work." — "  Atlas,"  in 
the  World. 


"  DICKENSIANA." 
"  If,  with  your  Dickens-lore  you'd  make 
Considerable  headway, 
The  way  to  be  well-read 's  to  take 

This  book  brought  out  by  Eedway. 
'Tis  clear,  exhaustive,  and  compact, 
Both  well-arranged  and  written ; 
A  mine  of  anecdote  and  fact, 

Compiled  by  P.  G.  Kitton." — Punch. 


GEOKGE  RED  WAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GAEDEN. 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Astrology  Theologized     ,   32 

Anatomy  of  Tobacco    17 

Antiquarian  Study    24. 

Astrologer's  Guide   26 

Archwology  and  Occultism    29 

Adams,  F.  W.  L   32 

Adams,  Mrs.  Davenport    3i 

Aruudale,  Miss    36 

Baughan,  Rosa                      ...   8,  14,  17 

Blavatsky,  H.  P                             21,  26 

Burma    22 

Batty,  Jolin    2i 

Bonatus    26 

Browne,  Hablot  K   30 

Betts,  B.  W   31 

Beauty  and  the  Beast    34 

Chirognomancy    17 

Cosmo  de'  Medici   11 

Citrate's  Wife  {The)    14 

Colman's  Plays                                ...  19 

Confessions  of  an  English  Hachish  Eater  20 

Cruikshank,  George    25 

Church,  W.E   25 

Cardan    26 

Cook,  Miss  Louisa  S   31 

Collette,  C.  H   35 

Chatterji,  Mohini  M.    ...    36 

Dickens    5 

Dickensiana   38 

Exeter    36 

East  Anglian    18 

Eliphas  Levi's  Writings   27 

Forlong,  Major-General  J.  G.  R.     ...  12 

Forty  Vezirs         ...   13 

Folk-Songs   23 

Geometrical  Psychology   31 

George,  G.  M   7 

Gibb,  B.  J.  W   13 

Hints  to  Collectors  5,  6 

Hubbe-Schleiden,  J.  U   35 

Heptameron   10 

Home,  R,  H   11, 12 

Hartmann,  F   10,  16 

Hampstead   15 

Hermes    33 

Ingram,  John  H   21 

Johnson,  CP  5,  6 

Jones,  Ebenezer   24 

Jones,  Sumner    24 

Judge,  W.  Q   33 

Jennings,  Hargrave    37 

Keightley,  B   36 

Kitton,  F.  G  13,  30,  38 

Kent,  Charles    15 

Kabala  Denudata   30 

Kingsford,  Mrs.  Anna,  M.D.  ...       32,  33 

Lamb   34 

Leech   13 

Linton,  W.  J   24 

Lilly   26 


PAGE 

Leolinus  Sihiricnsis    17 

Low  Down    27 

Literature  of  Occultism  and  Archa!ology  29 

Leicester    32 

Marchant,  W.  T   9 

Martin engo-Cesaresco,  Countess     ...  23 

Mathers,  S.  L.  M   30 

Maitland,  E   33 

Machen,  A   10,  17 

Magic         ...    10 

Memoirs  of  Mme.  Blavatsky    26 

Northy,  T.  J   36 

Nesfield,  H.  W..   31 

Northamptonshire  Notes  and  Queries  ...  27 

Occult  World  Phenomena    16 

Olcott,  H.  S   28 

Occultism  and  Archceology    29 

"  Phiz"    30 

Physiognomy    8 

Primitive  Symbolism    12 

Palmistry    14 

Panton,  J.  E   14 

Paracelsus   16 

Pope  Joan   35 

Praise  of  Ale    9 

Poe    11, 21 

Park   15 

Pat?i(T/i,6)   33 

Phallicism    37 

Raven  (The)    2I 

Regular  Pickle  (A)    31 

Sphinx    35 

Sultan  Stork    3 

Sheykh-Zada       ...   13 

Sinnett,  A.  P   ie,  18, '26,  36 

Sweeting,  W.  D   27 

Spiritual  Hermeneutics   33 

Sea  Songs  and  River  Rhxjraes    ...  34 

Shepherd,  R.  H.  ...        3,  4,  11,  19,  24,  34 

Swinburne  Bibliography  of    4 

Sithron    12 

Scott,  J.  G   22 

Studies  of  Sensation  and  Event  .. .      ..."  24 

Serjeant,  W.  C.  Eldon   26 

Theosophy,  Religion,  and  Occult  Science  28 

Tobacco  Talk    g 

Theosophist  (The)                            \\\  2I 

Two  Tramps                                   *'*  27 

Transactions  L.  L.  T.  S   36 

Thackeray   3,"6,  25 

Tamerlane   n 

United    ig 

Valley  of  Sorek    7 

Virgin  of  the  World    33 

Walford's  Antiquarian   20 

Westropp,  H,  M                             "  12 

Walford,  E   'is,  20 

Wellerisms                     ...         .       .  15 

White,  C.  H.  Evelyn   is 

Waite,  A.  E.    27 


