Of the Division of the Zodiac and Signs. CHAPTER 1. The Zodiac is one of the great circles in the sky, dividing the sphere into two equal parts, whose latitude is twelve degrees. Its longitude, however, is three hundred and sixty degrees, as will be explained more clearly soon. This circle is divided into twelve parts, which are called signs, and they received such names from a certain property or disposition of the stars. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. These signs are denoted by certain characters. The characters are figured in this manner: Aries ♈, Taurus ♉, Gemini ♊, Cancer ♋, Leo ♌, Virgo ♍, Libra ♎, Scorpio ♏, Sagittarius ♐, Capricorn ♑, Aquarius ♒, Pisces ♓.

Each of those signs, in turn, is divided into thirty parts, which are called degrees. And by this reckoning, the entire circle contains 360 degrees in longitude. A degree, likewise, is followed by sixty minutes. A minute, in turn, by sixty seconds. A second by

sixty thirds, a third by sixty fourths, and so on, proceeding by sexagesimal multiplication to infinity.

Of the planets, their motions and nature. CHAPTER II. Seven wandering stars or planets move under the Zodiac with their own continuous motion, and measure it in different periods of time: such as Saturn in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve; Mars in two; the Sun in 365 days and almost six hours; Venus and Mercury similarly; the Moon, however, in twenty-seven days and almost eight hours. According to the qualities of these planets and signs, their diverse motions, and various aspects to one another, the times of the soul change, and they have various effects on these lower things. Indeed, so that these may be known, it is necessary to know the nature of all the planets, which I will now attempt to describe.

Again, there is a manifold division of the signs. First, they are divided into northern and southern signs: which are so called because they incline towards that part of the sky from the equator. Northern: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo. Southern: Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.

Of the essential dignities of the planets. CHAPTER III. Planets exert their strengths and powers more in some places of the zodiac than in others. And in these places, therefore, they are said to be stronger and more fortunate. This happens because the nature of those places, or of the stars existing in these very places, is more suitable to the nature of the planets: and there is a mutual affinity of nature from one to the other: whence the ancients also called these the essential dignities of the planets. Of this kind are house, exaltation, triplicity, term, and face dedicated to them. And of each of these, we must speak.

Secondly, they are divided into right and oblique ascending signs. Right ascending signs are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius. Oblique ascending signs are Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Gemini. They are said to rise or ascend directly because with them a greater part of the equator than of the zodiac rises or ascends. Those are said to ascend or rise obliquely because with them half of the equator does not ascend: for a greater arc of the zodiac than of the equator rises. The lower six oblique ascending signs obey the upper right ascending signs, that is, from two signs equidistant from the beginning, or, an oblique ascending sign obeys a right ascending sign.

Thirdly, they are divided into four triplicities: airy, fiery, earthy, and watery. Fiery triplicity signs are Aries, Leo, Sagittarius. These are hot and dry, bilious, bitter, diurnal, masculine, and oriental. Earthy triplicity signs are Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn. These are cold and dry, melancholic, acidic, nocturnal, feminine, and meridional. Airy triplicity signs are Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. These are hot and humid, sanguine, sweet, diurnal, masculine, and occidental.

Watery triplicity signs are Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. These are cold and humid, phlegmatic, insipid, feminine, nocturnal, and septentrional (northern).

Fourthly, they are divided into cardinal, fixed, and common or mutable signs. Cardinal signs are Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn. So called because those who have them in the ascendant, that is, the first house at the hour of birth, will have their temperament twisted: or because their seasons are changeable. Fixed signs are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius. So called because their seasons are fixed, or because people in whose nativity they hold the ascendant or first house are fixed and stable in their words and deeds. Common or mutable signs are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces. Which are called by this name because their seasons of the year have something in common with the preceding and following, or because, as has been said, people in whose nativity they ascend are common in their words and deeds.

Finally, some signs are oriental, others meridional, others occidental, and others borealian. Likewise, some are masculine, others feminine; finally, some are called diurnal, and others nocturnal. What these are, we have taught when we spoke of the triplicities. They are called oriental, meridional, occidental, and borealian because they respect these parts of the world. Others are masculine, because if they hold the first house in a woman's nativity, they make the woman more robust and the man stronger. Feminine signs act entirely contrary, because they effeminate a man. Diurnal signs, finally, are so called because they make the native more beautiful and brighter. Nocturnal signs, however, produce a more deformed, darker, and obscure face.

Signs are again divided into four quarters, namely, vernal, aestival, autumnal, and hiemal. These quarters, constituting these seasons of the year, comprise the signs as follows: The vernal quarter, which is also called sanguine or puerile, comprises Aries, Taurus, Gemini. The autumnal quarter, which partakes of melancholy and refers to the third age, contains Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius. The aestival quarter, which is called bilious and youthful, contains these signs: Cancer, Leo, Virgo. The hiemal quarter, which is compared to old age and refers to phlegm, is constituted by Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. So much has been said about the division of the zodiac and signs. Now I proceed to the treatise on the planets: then I will briefly touch upon what dignities the planets have in the signs.

Beginning with Saturn (because he is superior to all planets), I will speak of them according to the order of the spheres. Saturn, therefore, is cold and dry, melancholic, an enemy to human nature and destructive of life, masculine, diurnal, malevolent, and the greater infortune.

Jupiter is hot and humid, sanguine, a friend to nature, masculine, diurnal, and the greater fortune.

Mars is immoderately hot and dry, choleric, masculine, nocturnal, malevolent, and the lesser infortune.

The Sun is moderately hot and dry, masculine, diurnal, a fortune by aspect, and an infortune by bodily conjunction.

Chapter 13: What signs and houses rule parts of the human body has been said in the preceding. For the first house and Aries govern the entire head, just as Taurus with the second house governs the neck. Gemini, together with the third house, presides over the shoulders and arms, as has been said, which are most important to note. Our body parts are treated and freed from diseases when such a constellation rules. But diseases that require treatment are either recent or inveterate. Therefore, if the diseases are inveterate, treatment should begin when the Moon is in an earthy triplicity, especially in Taurus. If, however, it is recent, the Moon should be in watery signs, especially at the time of purgation. Nevertheless, because either the disease does not allow, or the patients do not want to wait for this time, the following things must be especially observed. When one wishes to restore a diseased part to health, the Moon should occupy the sign ruling that part, or that sign should ascend. However, placing the Moon in the Ascendant is bad, for there it is afflicted by misfortune. For example, if you try to treat the head or any part of it, you will either place the Moon in Aries or cause Aries to ascend. If, however, the parts of the neck are to be restored to health, either Taurus will ascend, or the Moon will occupy it. If, finally, you wish to free the shoulders, hands, and arms from diseases, you will either cause Gemini to ascend or try to have the Moon occupy them.

Venus is cold and moderately humid, phlegmatic, the lesser fortune, feminine, nocturnal, and of good nature.

Chapter 14: Bloodletting is a universal evacuation that empties plenitude. Therefore, several things must be observed in bloodletting, or venesection, but especially the body's strength, the constitution of the air, and the movements of the stars, about which movements we are now speaking. As for the body's constitution and strength: it is not proper to draw blood from children before the fourteenth year, nor from the elderly after the seventieth, unless their strength permits. Indeed, there are some who allow it in their seventieth or even eightieth year, which some do not do in their sixtieth or fiftieth year due to weakness. Likewise, veins should not be cut in emaciated and consumptive individuals, nor in the obese: for in the latter, due to an abundance of fat, the vessels collapse during venesection; in the former, there is very little blood, which is absolutely necessary for nutrition. However, diseases in which it is suitable or not must be observed. For great diseases (as Galen testifies in the fourth book of Methodus) demand venesection, provided strength and age permit. In all diseases that have their origin in the blood, such as continuous fever and all kinds of phlegmons, bloodletting is beneficial. The air must also be inspected, whether it is hot or dry, or cold, or temperate. For when the air, either due to its constitution, the time of year, or the region, is too hot or too cold, blood should not be drawn: because too much heat dissolves, and too much cold refrigerates. Therefore, the air should be optimally temperate and constituted in the middle of all qualities when blood is drawn. Finally, the air should not be cloudy, but clear. Nor should the south wind blow at that time, but the north wind or the west wind (zephyrus favonius), which, taking its origin from the east, is temperate. But these things are taught sufficiently and more by physicians; therefore, let us proceed to our purpose.

Mercury is common in all things, and convertible; masculine with masculine planets, feminine with feminine, hot with hot, humid with humid; a fortune with fortunes, especially when conjoined or applying by a laudable aspect or body.

Chapter 15: Since (as has been very often said) the Moon influences these lower things according to the quality of the place in which it is. Therefore, because earthy signs are cold and dry, and their nature is to constrict: when the Moon is in them, that is, in Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, it is not a suitable time for a bath. But it will be suitable for a dissolving bath when the Moon is in Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, which are hot and dry signs, and it is the nature of heat to dissolve. When, however, moistening is desired, the Moon should be in Gemini or Libra, which are airy signs, but not in Aquarius, because it is Saturn's house. However, when cupping glasses are to be applied to the arms, shoulders, or hands, Gemini should be avoided, which at other times, like Aquarius, are suitable. Finally, cold and moist signs, such as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, are chosen when cooling and moistening are desired. They are also suitable when we wish to dissolve, for moisture prepares the humors for dissolution, which are afterwards dissolved by the bath.

Finally, the Moon is cold and humid, although it heats but little: yet it moistens more. It changes its nature or quality through its quarters, just as the Sun changes in the quarters and seasons of the year. It is also feminine and nocturnal, and the bearer of all virtues and impressions of the other planets. For all influences ultimately descend to us through its orb. So much has been said about the natures of the planets as pertains to our purpose.

Although there are different times at which celestial figures can be erected, we reduce them to two: namely, midday and post-meridian. The post-meridian time is taken from midday of one day to midday of the following day, that is, counting from one hour up to twenty-four hours. First, therefore, we will speak of the erection of houses at midday, since it has less difficulty; then for post-meridian time. If, therefore, you wish to erect the celestial chart or houses at midday: first, having drawn the figure (in the astronomical manner), the place of the Sun for the proposed midday is sought in the ephemeris tables. It will be found directly for your proposed day and in the table serving your year. That degree found, with its minutes (if there are any), is placed at the beginning or cusp of the tenth house, along with the character of the sign under which the Sun then exists. This done, let it be sought among

But to annex here the natures of the Dragon's Head and Tail does not seem to me beyond my purpose. The Dragon's Head, therefore, like Mercury, is good with good planets, and bad with bad. For in conjunction with benefics, it increases their goodness, but with malefics, it increases their malice. The Tail, however, is entirely contrary to the Head: for with benefics it is bad, and with malefics it is good: so that it diminishes the goodness of the good, and the malice of the bad.

In the erected figure, all planets, along with the head and tail of the Dragon, are to be placed in it; this will be done in the following way. The place of the planet found in the ephemeris at the proposed hour is sought in the houses: once found, you will place the planet there. But the sign of the planet's place is sometimes (and very often) noted in a house where the planet is not to be placed, because the degrees of its place are in another house, in which (as will be clear from the following example) the planet, with its degree, minute, and the character of the sign in which it was found, is to be placed. The character of the sign is written when another sign is written at the beginning of the house.

planets, the Head and Tail of the Dragon are figured by certain proper characters: which are as follows. Saturn ♄, Jupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Sun ☉, Venus ♀, Mercury ☿, Moon ☽. Dragon's Head ☊, Dragon's Tail ☋.

are placed, with the head and tail of the Dragon. The Head is noted in the ephemeris, but not the Tail: but it is always in opposition to the Head. Of certain Parts, and their invention. CAP. XVIII. The Part of Fortune is similarly to be placed in the figure, and if a question is made about a sick person, the Part of Life along with the Parts of Death and the killing planet, as will be said later in the third book. But we will teach their invention for the present. The Part of Life is taken in daytime from Jupiter to Saturn. In nighttime, however, the reverse, and it is projected from the Ascendant at both times. The Part of Fortune, in the day, is taken from the Sun to the Moon; in the night, however, from the Moon to the Sun, and like the Part of Life, it is added to the Ascendant both day and night. The Part of Death, day and night, is taken from the Moon to the degree of the eighth house; and it is projected from the sign in which Saturn is. The Part of the killing planet, in daytime, is counted from the lord of the Ascendant to the Moon. Conversely, however, it is taken from the Moon to the lord of the Ascendant, and projected from the Ascendant. Therefore, when it pleases to investigate the place of any part, first reducing the signs to numbers in order, so that Aries holds the first place: Taurus the second, and so on, so that Pisces is found to be the twelfth, it follows: Aries 1, Taurus 2, Gemini 3, Cancer 4, Leo 5, Virgo 6, Libra 7, Scorpio 8, Sagittarius 9, Capricorn 10, Aquarius 11, Pisces 12.

Of the first essential dignity, namely, the house. The Sun and Moon, two luminaries created by God, one to preside over the day, the other over the night: because they hold primacy in the generation and dominion of things and bodies, two signs suitable to their qualities and natures are assigned to them as houses. Namely, Cancer for the Moon, and Leo for the Sun, signs certainly closer to our zenith, and constituting the greater part of summer.

Now indeed (the figure having been erected, and the planets placed in it with the parts as shown), when about to give judgment on the proposed matter, certain things must be observed before judgment is pronounced, lest there be an error in it. First, therefore, the seventh house and its lord must be observed: because if the seventh house is impeded by the aspect or presence of malefics, or its lord is impeded, that is, if it is in its fall, or retrograde, or combust, or impeded in any other way by the misfortunes already predicted, it is not safe to judge, lest an error be committed in judging. For Ptolemy says in the 14th aphorism of his Centiloquium: 'In how many errors does the astrologer find himself when the seventh house and its lord are afflicted.' Furthermore, it must be diligently observed whether the question is radical or not. This is known if the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of the hour are the same, or of the same triplicity or nature. For when this constellation exists, the question is radical. Conversely, it is not at all: therefore, one must doubt an absolute judgment.

constituting. However, they agree in qualities or natures among themselves: because Cancer is cold and humid, feminine, nocturnal, and cardinal like the Moon. Leo, however, is a sign that is hot and dry, masculine, fixed, and diurnal like the Sun itself. The aforementioned planets have a single sign as their house. The remaining five planets, however, possess two signs, one diurnal and the other nocturnal. Hence, a diurnal sign is called a diurnal house. And a nocturnal sign, a nocturnal house.

Before we come to judgments, we must learn about significators: namely, who and what they are. A significator, therefore, is both the house signifying the matter, and the planet that has many dignities in that house, which is called the lord of the house, about whose invention we have spoken in the preceding sections. Therefore, when any question is brought forward: the Ascendant with its ruler is to be given to the querent, or the author of the question. The house signifying the matter sought, and its lord, is to be attributed to the matter about which the question is asked. The Moon, common to all questions, is always to be attributed to the querent along with the Ascendant and its lord. (For example) if someone asks a question about the state of his brother: the Ascendant and the lord of the Ascendant, and the Moon, are for the querent. The third house and its lord will be given to his brother. Or if someone asks about the illness of a certain person: the Ascendant, its lord, and the Moon are for the sick person; the sixth house with its lord are to be attributed to the illness. And so it is to be done for other questions. Meanwhile, however, it must be known that sometimes many significators are to be taken: as in those matters that occur with the intervention of envoys, or some others: such as sales, peace treaties, marriages, and many similar things. In these, with the Ascendant, its lord, and the Moon, the planet from which the Moon separates is to be mixed in. The planet to which the Moon applies is to be given to the matter about which the question is asked, along with its other aforesaid significators. Also added to these significators is the planet that has something in common with the signification of the matter. For example, when someone proposes a question about a future marriage: the Ascendant, the lord of the Ascendant, and the Moon, and the planet from which she separates, are to be given to the querent: but the seventh house, its lord, and the planet to which the Moon applies, you will give to the person about whom the question is asked. If the querent is a man, add the Sun to his significators, because the Sun signifies a man. To the significators of the person about whom the question is asked, attribute Venus. If, however, a woman asks the question, to her significators, Venus, who rules women; to the others, you will give the Sun. And so it is to be done for others. For their condition, both among themselves and with benefics or malefics, shows what will happen concerning the matter. Therefore, enough has been said about significators: it seems appropriate to proceed auspiciously to judgments.

Saturn, therefore, because he is an enemy to nature, obtained opposite houses, namely Capricorn and Aquarius. For Capricorn is a nocturnal house, and Aquarius is diurnal.

Having finished speaking about the principles of this science and necessary observations: now the direct series of precepts invites us to deliver the correct method for bringing matters to completion. Let us therefore say in how many ways all matters are brought to perfection. This indeed happens in four ways: namely, by conjunction or congress, by translation of light and nature, by collection of light, and by existence in the houses. Therefore, when the lord of the Ascendant, the significator of the matter sought, and the Moon are joined, either by conjunction or aspect, the matter is entirely brought to completion, especially if the conjunction occurs in the Ascendant. It happens, however, with some difficulty when they are joined in the house signifying the matter sought. Secondly, it is brought to completion by translation of light and nature, that is, if the aforesaid significators are not joined by conjunction or aspect, there is some planet present which separates from one of the significators, and has been received by it, and applies to the other significator, before it applies to any other: because then it transfers the light and nature received from one to the other. For he who receives the light is the author of the perfection of the matter. By this method it happens,

Jupiter, however, because he is a parent and friend to nature, had his houses, looking at the houses of the Sun and Moon with a trine aspect: and because he follows Saturn, he obtained one sign before Saturn's houses and another after, namely Sagittarius and Pisces. Sagittarius is a diurnal house, and Pisces is nocturnal.

Many and varied questions are usually brought forward, which relate to one of the twelve houses, according to their significations. But because each house possesses almost innumerable significations, if we wished to pursue them all and gather them into one volume, our immense labor would easily grow. Therefore, having proposed and brought forward a single question for each house, the rest will be easily judged (provided the aforesaid are understood). The first house, therefore, discerns about life: hence a question proposed about an absent person, whether he is dead or alive, refers to the first house. Therefore, when you wish to solve such a question: see if the lord of the Ascendant, the Moon, and the lord of the eighth house are joined together, for that argues that the person has departed from the living. See also if there is a translation of light from the lord of the Ascendant to the lord of the eighth, or vice versa: or if the lord of the eighth is in the Ascendant, or the lord of the Ascendant is placed in an angle of the earth (4th house). For all these things say that the person has ended his life. Furthermore, the condition of the lord of the Ascendant with benefics or malefics must be observed: inasmuch as applications with benefics bring life; with malefics, however, detriment and death. The same is to be judged concerning the Ascendant and the Part of Fortune. For the presence of malefics in the Ascendant, or with the Part of Fortune, brings death; of benefics, however, life.

Now Mars follows next, who is almost an enemy to nature like Saturn: thus his houses look at the houses of the Sun and Moon with an aspect of imperfect enmity, namely a square. Therefore, the houses of Mars are the signs of Aries and Scorpio. Aries is diurnal, and Scorpio is nocturnal.

When someone brings forward a question, whether he can possess some substance: and if it can happen, he desires to know when it will happen: yet he does not wish to say from whom he hopes to receive it. Nevertheless, when giving a response, it must be seen whether there is some application between the lord of the second house, the Moon, and the lord of the Ascendant: or if there is no application, it must be seen whether there is a translation of light and nature between them: or if their light is collected by some superior planet, or if the lord of the second house is fortunate in the Ascendant, and aspects the Part of Fortune, or if the lord of the Ascendant is fortunate and situated in the second house: because if any of these, or several, are present, they denote that the querent will acquire the substance. If, however, they are not found, the opposite will happen: unless the Moon has its seat in the second house. The time when this will happen you will know, if for each degree intercepted between their conjunction or aspect to Jupiter or the Part of Fortune, or from one significator to another, you attribute one day, week, month, or year according to the quality of the sign. For cardinal signs signify hours or days; mutable signs, however, months or weeks; and fixed signs attribute years or months. By this method, therefore, the time when any sought matter will happen is known.

Furthermore, the houses of Venus are Taurus and Libra: Taurus is nocturnal, Libra is diurnal. And as she is of a good and benevolent nature, her houses look at the houses of the Sun and Moon with a sextile aspect, that is, an aspect of imperfect friendship.

Matters in the nature of things are such that the complexions and qualities of people are varied. Some wander perpetually through cities and regions; others, however, never or rarely move from their homeland and their seat. Various accidents usually happen to travelers and those traversing lands: hence various questions are proposed about them. Therefore, when a question is moved by someone about the condition of his brother: the third house, which judges about brothers, must be seen, and its lord must be observed, and the lord of the triplicity. For their condition with benefics or malefics shows what his disposition is. If the lord of the third is in the sixth house, or the lord of the sixth in the third, or one has an application or aspect with the other: they argue that he is afflicted by illness. If, however, the significators of the brother are in the seventh house, or the Moon, or the lord of the seventh in the third, or there is an application between them, they indicate that he has married or will marry. If, however, these dispositions are with the lord of the eighth house, or the house itself, or the lord of the third is in the fourth house, they signify that he is dead. An application or aspect or conjunction of the brother's significators with benefics indicates that he is well: with malefics, however, they act to the contrary. In this way, judgment is to be made concerning the condition of the brother's significators with the lords of other houses, and concerning other proposed questions, whether about the father, or the mother, or the wife, or the children, or others that can be varied and diverse.

Lastly, Mercury follows, whose houses are Gemini and Virgo. Gemini is diurnal, and Virgo is nocturnal. Because Mercury is of a common nature, these are not conjoined with the houses of the Sun and Moon by any aspect.

If someone proposes a question about buying a house, whether he can obtain it or not. To the querent, you attribute the Ascendant, its lord, and the planet from which the Moon separates; to the property, the fourth house, its lord, and the Moon; to the price, the tenth house with its lord. If he does not wish to say who the seller of the land is: to the seller, you will give the seventh house, its lord, and the planet to which the Moon applies. If, however, he wished to say the seller's name: another significator would be given to him: for example, if he wished to buy his brother's land, we would give the third house and its lord to the seller. But since he does not wish to say the seller's name (either because he does not know it, or for another reason): as said, the seventh house with its lord, and the planet to which the Moon applies, will be given to him. Now, in order that we may know what will happen concerning the matter: it must be seen what the disposition of all those significators is. For if the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of the seventh are joined together, or there is some application or translation of light between them, he will easily obtain the matter, especially if reception is present, and the application or aspect is one of friendship. If these are not present: it must be seen whether the lord of the seventh is in the Ascendant, or the lord of the Ascendant in the seventh: for this is the author of the perfection of the matter. Likewise, it is to be judged if some conjunction or application or translation of light is found between the planet from which the Moon separates and the one to which it applies: provided that the translation does not happen through the Moon. Or also if the one from whom the Moon separates is in the seventh, or the one to whom it applies is placed in the first: the querent will have the matter sought. If, however, none of these are found: it must be observed whether the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of the fourth and the Moon are joined together, or if there is some application or translation of light between them: or if the lord of the fourth or the Moon are found in the Ascendant, or the lord of the Ascendant in the fourth: for these, in place of the others, perfect the matter. In the same way, judgment is to be made concerning the disposition of the lord of the tenth house with the Ascendant's.

But since the Sun is found at the beginning of the tenth house, aspecting the Ascendant with a square aspect, and Mars in the sixth house having no communion with the Ascendant, the Sun will be the lord of the Ascendant. Mars, however, is a participant with the Sun, because of its many dignities in Aries, and obtains rulership in the Ascendant with the Sun, although the Sun holds the principality. By this method, therefore, the lords of the remaining houses are to be inquired.

Since women sometimes say they are pregnant, or deny it, or are ignorant and wish to know: for which reason a question is very often brought to us. So that we may briefly resolve it, the condition of the lord of the fifth house, the lord of the ascendant, and the Moon, together, or with benefics and angles, must be observed. If, therefore, the lord of the ascendant and the Moon are in the fifth house, or the lord of the fifth is in the ascendant and free from malefics, they show that the woman is pregnant. The dispositions of the significator with the lord of the ascendant and the Moon, about which much has been said before, also announce the same. If also the lord of the ascendant or the significator aspects a planet existing in an angle, it announces conception. Conversely, when it aspects a planet falling from an angle, or if she is pregnant, she will suffer an abortion: which a mutable sign in the ascendant, or an afflicted planet, also promises. A fixed sign in the ascendant, however, and a benefic planet in the same, portends a true conception. Likewise, a planet having many dignities in the fifth house, and situated therein, and aspected by the Moon, foretells a true conception. The strength of the lord of the fifth house in the ascendant or tenth also predicts the same no less. But when a woman is pregnant, and you desire to know whether she will bear a male or a female: see if the lord of the ascendant, the Moon, and the lord of the fifth house have their seat in a masculine sign, or if several of them do: because they announce that the woman will bear a male. If, however, they hold feminine signs, they indicate a female. Or in a similar way, see if the lord of the hour and the lord of the house of children and the Moon, or two of these, are in masculine signs, because they bring a male: but in feminine signs, a female. I would have proposed and explained some question of the sixth house, had not the third treatise of our work almost entirely referred to this. Therefore, enough has been said about this, I will approach a single question of the seventh house. (I would have proposed and explained some question of the sixth house, had not the third treatise of our work almost entirely referred to this. Therefore, enough has been said about this, I will approach a single question of the seventh house.) This last sentence is a transition and not part of the rule itself, but included for verbatim completeness as per instructions. The original text has a slight repetition/awkward phrasing here, which is preserved in the translation for accuracy to the source material's style and content flow. The instruction is to not modernize, paraphrase, or summarize the Latin, so the full Latin and its direct translation are provided, even if it includes a meta-commentary on the text's structure. The instruction also states to keep each card focused on a specific astrological rule or judgment (under 500 words). This section is about pregnancy and gender, and the last sentence is a structural comment by the author, not an astrological rule. However, it's part of the paragraph. I will keep it as is, as it's not excessively long. If it were a long digression, I would consider splitting. For now, it's fine. The instruction also says

From this question proposed by a man, it will also be right to resolve that which a woman brings: assigning to each their proper significator: it is resolved in this manner. To the querent, first assign the ascendant, the lord of the ascendant, the Moon, the planet from which the Moon separates, and the Sun as significators. To the woman, however, the seventh house, its lord, the planet to which the Moon applies, and Venus. Then observe what kind of disposition exists between the lord of the ascendant and the Moon with the lord of the seventh house; and between the planet from which the Moon separates, with the one to which it applies, and the Sun with Venus. For a sextile or trine application signifies an easy effect; but a square and opposition, a difficult one; separation, however, argues for diminution and abolition. If, therefore, the lord of the ascendant or the Moon holds the seventh house, or the planet from which the Moon separates aspects or applies to the planet to which the Moon applies, or the Sun to Venus, they argue that marriage will happen (though with labor and difficulty): and this especially if the application was one of enmity. For these produce enmities and hatred, and on account of this, they destroy the work, unless better other significations intervene. But when the lord of the seventh is placed in the first house, or conjoined with the lord of the ascendant, or the planet to which the Moon applies aspects with a trine or sextile aspect the one from which she separates, or applies to it with the same aspect, or Venus to the Sun: the querent will most easily marry the woman. However, this will happen with difficulty if there is no reception and a replication of a square or opposition. The lord of the ascendant, also, if received, signifies action. But if you find none of the aforesaid, observe whether there is some translation of light or collection between them: because these, no less than the aforesaid, promise the querent the wife he desires to marry: but that will be accomplished through intervening messengers. Finally, the Moon free from malefics and received promises the same. (The original text has a slight repetition/awkward phrasing here, which is preserved in the translation for accuracy to the source material's style and content flow. The instruction is to not modernize, paraphrase, or summarize the Latin, so the full Latin and its direct translation are provided, even if it includes a meta-commentary on the text's structure. The instruction also states to keep each card focused on a specific astrological rule or judgment (under 500 words). This section is about marriage, and the last sentence is a structural comment by the author, not an astrological rule. However, it's part of the paragraph. I will keep it as is, as it's not excessively long. If it were a long digression, I would consider splitting. For now, it's fine. The instruction also says

Such a question is sometimes brought forward, namely, whether a querent can obtain the goods of a wife. This is resolved according to the disposition of the ascendant and its lord and the Moon, with the eighth house and its lord: because the eighth house contains the substance of women. If, therefore, the lord of the first house, the Moon, and the lord of the eighth are conjoined, or united by aspect or application, the querent will obtain the woman's goods. Or if some application with reception, or translation of light, or collection is found between them: the desired thing will be given to the querent. But if these are not found, see if the lord of the ascendant or the Moon have their seat in the eighth house: because they grant the woman's goods to the querent, though with much labor and many prayers. The lord of the eighth house in the ascendant, however, easily accomplishes the matter. But if none of these intervene, the desired thing will be nullified.

When you are asked by someone about to undertake a journey, concerning what will happen to him on the way, and about his quick or slow return. Pay diligent attention to the significator of the journey and the lord of the ascendant and the Moon. For if the significator of the journey, that is, the lord of the ninth house, and the lord of the ascendant or the Moon are conjoined, or one applies to the other, or a translation of light or collection is present between them, and the greater part of them hold mutable signs, the journey will be completed immediately and in a short time. But if they hold fixed signs, he will complete his journey in a long time. If finally they hold common signs, in a moderate time and he will undertake another journey from one. But if the lords of the ascendant or ninth are unfortunate or retrograde or combust, they impede the way and bring detriment. But if the lord of the ascendant or ninth are benefics, or apply to the lord of the eleventh house, or if a benefic is in the ninth, they signify that the journey will be prosperous: and they denote that the querent will obtain what he seeks. If the Moon is in the sixth house, or the twelfth, or conjoined with the lord of the sixth, and she is unfortunate, or the lord of the ascendant or ninth are afflicted by the lord of the sixth, they bring illness to the traveler. And in this way, judgment is to be made concerning fortunes or misfortunes according to the condition of the significators with benefics or malefics and the lords of the houses.

If anyone raises a question about some dignity or office that he hopes to obtain, whether he will possess it or not. See if the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the tenth house are conjoined, or one applies to the other by trine or sextile with reception, and judge that he will have the office. Say the same if you find the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the tenth house in angles, with no malefic intervening. But if the lord of the ascendant is cadent from the lord of the tenth, and does not aspect him, and the lord of the tenth is cadent from the tenth house, and does not aspect it: unless a benefic planet is present, transferring light from one to the other, he will not obtain the office: and this indicates that the office is separated from the prince. If the lord of the ascendant is in the tenth house, or the Moon is received, or the lord of the tenth is received in the ascendant, they promise the office to the querent. But if some planet, heavier than the lords of the ascendant and tenth, collects their light: it places the querent in office, just as other significations do. But if the lord of the house of trust (eleventh) is unfortunate, and aspects the unfortunate Moon, or if the Moon is unfortunate in the eleventh, the office will not be given to the querent. But if the lord of the eleventh house is a benefic, and aspects the fortunate Moon or the lord of the ascendant, or the lord of the tenth with a good aspect, or applies to one, or has its seat in the tenth: it promises and imparts the dignity to the querent. If, however, the lord of the eleventh house is a benefic, and the Moon is unfortunate, and the lord of the eleventh is situated in an excellent place, and the Moon is found cadent from benefics and the eleventh: it absolves part of the matter. But that misfortune of the Moon, if inflicted by Mars, and Mars is powerful in the sky, and aspects the lord of the eleventh and the ascendant: it brings death to the querent after obtaining the office: unless some intervening benefic prohibits that evil. The lords of the tenth and eleventh being benefics: and aspecting each other with reception (even if the Moon is unfortunate by Saturn) promise the office to the querent: who, however, because of the Moon's misfortune inflicted by Saturn, will be endowed with bad morals in that very dignity, and will not gain friendship, but rather hatred and discord for himself.

If perchance someone brings forward a question about some thing, whether it be a dignity or any other matter, whether he will obtain it or not. But if he does not wish to say what he hopes for. Look and take the significator from the eleventh house. For if the lord of the eleventh applies to the lord of the ascendant, or the lord of the ascendant to the lord of the eleventh, or aspects him: the querent will obtain the thing he hopes for. And this easily if the application is a trine or sextile. The same will happen when the lord of the eleventh is received in an angle. Also, when the receiver of the Moon's disposition is received, and its recipient is received, he will have it completely and easily. In the same way, judgment is to be made concerning the lord of the ascendant. But when the receiver of the Moon's disposition holds a common sign, he will have a very small part of the desired thing: as also when it is in a mutable sign. But when it has its seat in a fixed sign, the whole thing will come to him. This will also happen when there are applications or translations of light or collections, about which we have often spoken before. In the same way, judgment is to be made when someone asks if he will acquire the friendship of a certain person he wishes to enter into. For if you find the lord of the ascendant, the Moon, and the lord of the eleventh conjoined, or one of these applying to another, judge that what he desires will happen: and this especially if the applications or aspects are of friendship. But if there are enmities before they come together, or even after they have come together, strife and discord will be stirred up between them: and on account of this, they will reconcile with difficulty.

When someone asks about the state of a hidden enemy. See who is the lord of the twelfth house, with its condition relative to other houses and planets: because according to its condition, we pronounce judgment about the hidden enemy. For if the lord of the twelfth house is in the sixth, or conjoined with the lord of the sixth, it argues that the enemy is afflicted by illness: or also if the lord of the sixth is in the twelfth. But if you find the significator of the hidden enemy conjoined with the lord of the tenth house: it judges him to be either in a royal house or conjoined with a king, so that he may have something from him, and this will be to the querent's detriment if he aspects the ascendant or its lord with a square aspect or opposition, you will judge. But if you find the lord of the twelfth house placed in the fourth, or in the house of death, or conjoined with the lord of death, that is, the lord of the eighth house, you will judge him to be dead or about to die soon. Therefore, in this way, you will judge the state of the hidden enemy according to the condition of his significator. But if the querent wishes to state the enemy's name, or if the enemy is not hidden, but manifest, inquire about his state from the seventh house and its lord. For since the seventh house is joined to the ascendant by an inimical aspect: judgment is rightly sought from it concerning manifest enemies. In this way, it will be possible to seek judgment for all proposed questions: therefore, enough has been said about them for the sake of brevity. For Guido Bonatus, Hali Abenragel, and many others teach more about individual questions. If anyone, however, diligently reads and understands the aforesaid, he will make a certain and definite judgment about all questions. END.

TREATISE ON SUITABLE ELECTIONAL BEGINNINGS FOR UNDERTAKINGS by Claude Dariot, Physician of Pomar.

The principles or elements of the whole art have already been shown: and how, and by what method, one ought to arrive at it; and all proposed questions can be referred or reduced to the twelve houses, so that their significator may be found. Now, however, so that we leave nothing untouched, I will briefly outline, in a concise and compressed style, a universal treatise on suitable temporal electional principles for initiating actions. I will therefore explain by what method the proper constitution of the heavens and superior bodies must be observed at the beginning of things. For not every hour of the day is suitable for beginning all works: rather, the constellation of one hour is suitable for the beginning of a certain work, while another is suitable for others. Therefore, at least in great matters and in those things which arise from the natural complexion of the elements and the course of the stars, the proper celestial constellation must be chosen. Therefore, we will speak in the following about those things which must be observed in each election, and about the foundations of elections.

An election should not be made for one whose nativity, or annual revolution, or the hour of the question, or ascendant is unknown. For perhaps an ascendant contrary to the ascendant of his radical nativity would be given. For example, the twelfth, sixth, or eighth house of his radical chart might be forced to ascend: from which harm would come to him. For we sometimes see someone undertake some work under a good constellation, from which, however, he receives nothing but harm and misfortune. But another, who begins something at a time of a bad constellation, nevertheless gains some good fortune from it. Or (as often happens) we see two or more people simultaneously and at the same hour undertake a journey or board a ship: some of whom return home with profit and good fortune; others, however, are in danger, and others return home with loss and misfortune. This does not happen for any other reason than the diversity of their radical nativities. For a good election could not avert the evil that the planets promised in the radical nativity. But someone might say, elections are useless. Indeed, a good election is useful when the significators of the radical chart aid the goodness of the election. But if these are good or mediocre, or at least not very bad, then the election is useful. For when the significators of the nativity have promised something good or bad in any matter, a good election aids the good, or prevents or diminishes the evil. For Ptolemy says in the fifth word of his Centiloquium: 'He who is knowledgeable can avert many effects of the stars: when he knows their nature, and prepares himself before their event.' And Solomon says, 'A wise man will rule the stars.' Therefore, he who foresees the future is considered wise, and he either prevents or at least diminishes impending evil. Otherwise, there is no place left for election. For example, if someone makes an election for having children: but he has the significators of children condemned in his radical nativity, and thus signifying deprivation of children, the election will not profit him. For it cannot remove that harm which the radical significators brought: unless the election is optimal, and the harm is equal to the felicity.

Some signs are mutable, others fixed, and others common: as has already been clearly stated before. Not every sign can be suitable for every work. For fixed signs bring stability to things. Therefore, things that are meant to last long, such as houses, fortifications, the planting of trees and other plants, marriage, and similar matters, should begin with fixed signs ascending. Mutable signs, however, act entirely contrary. So that whatever begins with them ascending, quickly and swiftly comes to an end. Therefore, with these holding the ascendant or horoscope, it is good to sow, sell, buy, give a woman a marriage pledge, and begin other similar things. Common signs, finally, or mutable signs, have a quality mixed from the two former. In these, therefore, it is appropriate to begin that which is common to two or more. For example, it is best to form a partnership with someone for the sake of good or profit. For things done in these signs undergo change: so that a disease is cured in them, then returns, and becomes residual; they also cause those who undertake a journey in them to go from one to another. Therefore, in this way, signs suitable for the qualities of things must be chosen. But this, I think, must be observed not only in mutable, fixed, and common signs: but also in other qualities. For among fixed signs, earthy ones are most suitable. Among mutable signs, however, airy or fiery ones. Therefore, when someone wishes to act quickly and swiftly by means of fire: it is right to choose common and fiery signs, or at least airy ones. But when someone wishes to plant a tree, or build a house, or do something similar, let him choose fixed signs, especially earthy ones. Or when someone is about to travel by water, let him take a mutable and watery sign. And so in other matters, as the qualities of the signs correspond to the works, it is appropriate to choose. Now, however, follow the canons for the elections of works.

Having the nativity or annual revolution, or the question, the significator of the house and nativity or the thing itself to be begun must be adapted. But if these are unknown, the hour of the inception of the matter, the house signifying the matter, and its lord must be adapted and made fortunate. For example, if someone wished to undertake a journey to a king, the ninth house and its lord should be adapted, and if possible, the tenth house of the nativity or revolution or question should be made to ascend, and its lord fortified in the ascendant or tenth house. Likewise, the ascendant, the lord of the ascendant, and the lord of the house itself must be diligently and accurately adapted: and the sign of the ascendant should be suitable in nature and quality for the thing itself to be begun: as was said about these in the preceding. For example, for beginning a war, the signs of Mars are to be chosen. And so in other matters, as has already been said. If, however, the lord of the ascendant is unfortunate, you should compel him to aspect the ascendant with a trine or sextile. The Moon likewise, because she is common to all things, and her lord, that is, the lord of the sign or house she holds, must be strengthened and adapted. However, do not allow the Moon to ascend: because in the ascendant she is afflicted by misfortune. Furthermore, do not say that one should place the Sun in the ascendant or the house signifying the matter, or in Aries or Leo, who is otherwise considered malefic. The planet naturally signifying the matter must also be adapted: for example, if someone wishes to celebrate a marriage, Venus must be strengthened: but Mars if he intends to wage war: in matters of substance, however, Jupiter must be taken. For these naturally rule and dominate these matters, and so it must be done in others. Moreover, the place of the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries immediately preceding, and its lord, must be adapted. Similarly, the house of trust (eleventh) and its lord, the tenth house and its lord, and that which attends to the end of the matter, must be optimally placed. But he who attends to the end of the matter is the lord of the fourth house, when he aspects or holds it: otherwise, it will be the lord of the Moon's house, if he aspects the Moon, or the planet to which the Moon first conjoins, after him the lord of the Part of Fortune when he aspects it takes signification, or the Moon, and especially its lord retains signification, or the fourth sign from that in which the Moon then was, or (as some prefer) the lord of the fourth sign from the place of the Part of Fortune. These are the things to be observed in the elections of matters. But if all the aforesaid cannot be adapted: nevertheless, one must strive with all one's might to observe what can be observed. Therefore, the significator of the matter, the ascendant, its lord, and the Moon must at least be adapted. But if the Moon is unfortunate, you will make her fall from the ascendant. But you will choose the planet inflicting harm on the Moon as the lord of the ascendant. For in this way, when the horoscope is placed under its power, it will not harm itself, provided it is free from misfortunes. But if it cannot rule the first house, let it rule the tenth or eleventh or fifth. But if in the meantime the Moon were received by it: it would cause no or little misfortune, and its malice would be diminished. Benefics, that is, Jupiter or Venus, must also be placed in the ascendant or tenth. Or at least if the lord of the hour were adapted, some help in the matter would come from it. These, therefore, are briefly what we have said are to be desired and observed in elections. Now, however, I will briefly touch upon what is to be avoided.

At the beginning of any work, diligent care must be taken that the lord of the ascendant is not retrograde: for when he is disposed in this way, whatever is done tends more to evil than to good: and entirely brings the whole matter to the contrary. For even if all other significators are optimally disposed: the matter will either be accomplished with maximum labor, or not at all. For regression retards or prohibits all operations of all things. It must also be diligently observed and avoided that malevolent and unfortunate planets do not hold the ascendant or midheaven or any other angle: especially if they are lords of evil houses, namely the sixth, eighth, or twelfth, nor should fixed stars of a malefic nature have their seat in these places, especially the ascendant and tenth. Likewise, the sixth, eighth, or twelfth house of the nativity or question should not ascend at the beginning of a work. For these houses have no communion or aspect with the ascendant: therefore, they are evil and perverse, and bring detriment, and on account of this, they are rightly and deservedly to be avoided. Furthermore, no work should begin at the time of a conjunction or opposition of the luminaries: especially if they are with the Head or Tail of the Dragon. One of these, however, in the ascendant and in the house of the desired thing, or with the Part of Fortune, must be avoided. The Tail, however, is worse than the Head. The Moon also, situated in the second, sixth, eighth, or twelfth house, is evil and iniquitous, and on account of this, she must be avoided in these places. Finally, the Part of Fortune at the beginning of any matter should not be removed from the Moon's aspects or conjunction, or be cadent from an angle. But if you conjoin it to the lord of the ascendant, or place it in his aspect, you will show great utility to your operation. These things, therefore, briefly said about elections, suffice. I would have illustrated the matter with some examples, had not all of them been transferred to the third book, where we teach what medicines, both external and internal, are suitable to apply. Therefore, I refer benevolent readers to that book. With these things, learn this, you. END.

SIGNS of health are almost all gathered from the lord of the ascendant. If therefore the lord of the ascendant is in one of the angles, and especially the tenth, joined to benefics and fortunate, it portends health. When the Moon, by conjunction or aspect, reaches the lord of the ascendant, and he is fortunate, it presages a good future crisis, which will especially begin to appear if the Moon, being well-fortified, reaches him before applying to any other planet. But if the lord of the ascendant is fortunate, and leaves one sign and enters another, and is swift in his motion, it shows that the illness ought to end in a short time: provided, however, that he is not in the eighth or twelfth house. AVTHO. CLAV. DARIOTO MEDI. 89 salutis signum ostendit. A Luna item à caeli figura et ab omnibus partibus, praecipuè à parte fortunae salutis signa sumuntur. Si enim Luna benè affecta fuerit, et in angulis vel succedentibus sita sit, et in sui incremento ac morbi principio cum Marte non fuerit: ac si pars fortunae et aliae partes, praecipuè pars vitae benè collocatae fuerint et fortes, salutem futuram ostendunt. Cum denique Iupiter trino aut sextili aspectu Solem respicit, salutis spem auget. Antequam autem iudicium proferatur, animadvertendum est an prosperitates infortunia superant, aut contra. Si enim aequales fuerint, difficillimum est iudicium: diligenter ideò consideranda sunt. An acutus vel chronicus morbus sit. CAP. X. POSTEA QUAM an curabilis sit morbus necne, monstratum est. Si curabilem esse agnoscamus: reliquum est ut an acutus sit vel chronicus, id est, an brevis vel longus, videamus. Quod ut agnoscamus sexta domus, eius dominus, Luna, dominus ascendentis, planeta à quo separatur, et ea cui applicat animadvertendi sunt. Si enim sextae domus signum ex fixorum numero sit, et eius dominus sit in signo fixo situs, vel planeta gravis (ut sunt Saturnus et Iupiter) fuerit, morbi longitudinem praenuntiant. Si autem in mobilibus signis collocatus fuerit, et in sexta mobile signum fuerit, morbi brevitatem facit. Si denique fixorum et mobilium loco, communia sive media adsunt, morbi residuam timere iubent. Simili via et ratione de planeta à quo separatur dominus ascendentis iudicandum est. Luna etiam animadvertenda est. Si enim in suo motu tardior sit, et lumine crescat, morbi augmentum denuntiat: ut etiam si in morbi principio et in sui incremento cum Marte et in decremento cum Saturno sit: morbi perniciem eiusque longitudinem praesagit. Idem etiam praestat si in signo fixo et infortunata, id est malè collocata sit. Quando item in morbi principio Luna à combustione exit, infirmitas crescit, quousque Luna ad loci in quo erat, in morbi insultu oppositionem veniat, quo in loco si fortunatos planetas inveniat, morbus iudicabitur. Si verò infortunatos aut morietur aeger aut diuturnior morbus erit. Sed de his latius in sequentibus, cum de crisibus fiet sermo, dicemus. Dominus item domus Lunae animadvertendus est, qui si infortunatus sit, morbi longitudinem arguit. Morbi etiam longitudo ut Hali inquit, à domini ascendentis cum fortunatis vel infortunatis vicinitate sumitur. Si enim ascendentis dominus ad planetam fortunatum subito coniunctione vel aspectu pervenit, brevem morbum facit: si autem tarde, longum. Partes item fortunae, vitae, mortis et planetae interficientis (quibus omnibus fortunae pars antecellit) animadvertendae sunt. Quando itaque partes illae benè collocatae sunt, et in signis mobilibus, morbi brevitatem: si autem malè et in signis fixis, longitudinem praenuntiat. Tempus autem longitudinis morbi invenitur, si gradus qui sunt inter applicationem significatorum cum fortunatis numerantur, et pro gradu quolibet dies una sumatur, si signum mobile sit: si verò sit fixum, hebdomadam vel mensem vel annum: si autem commune sit, diem vel hebdomadam vel mensem dabimus: quia cum significatores fortunatis applicant, tunc morbus iudicatur. De criticis indicativis, et intercidentibus diebus, ac eorum inventione. CAP. XI. SUPEREST nunc ut de criticis diebus ac eorum indicativis et intercidentibus quidpiam dicamus. Quae res ut clarius intelligatur, quid sit crisis initio dicendum est. Omnis enim quae à ratione de aliqua re institutio suscipitur, à definitione debet proficisci, ut intelligatur quid sit de quo disputatur. Crisin igitur Galenus in commentario 13. sectione secunda aphorismorum et commentario 230. et libro primo epidemion commentario 3. et tertio prognosticorum commentario primo, dicit esse vehementem in morbis mutationem ad salutem vel mortem. Non me latet dictionem iudicium à medicis multis sumi modis. Sed nunc in ea significatione à Galeno in iam dictis locis accepta, capitur: nempe pro subita mutatione in morbo ad salutem vel ad mortem. Crisis autem alia est perfecta, alia imperfecta. Perfecta est quando morbus integre et absolute iudicatur. Eaque duplex, perfecta laudabilis, cum scilicet, morbus ad salutem iudicatur: et perfecta illaudabilis, cum morbus integre iudicatur, sed ad mortem. Imperfecta est quando integre morbus non iudicatur: sed ex eo quidpiam relinquitur, et residuam facit: idque dupliciter. Vel enim morbus paulatim ad mortem tendit, et mala iudicatio dicitur: vel paulatim ad salutem accedit, et laudabilis imperfecta vocatur. Crisium item alia est salva, quae sine magnis et perniciosis accidentibus sit. Alia dubia, quae scilicet, cum illis advenit. Alia denique est iudicata, ut quando die quarta signa coctionis apparent, morbum septimo die iudicaturum denuntiant. Non iudicata alia, ut illa quae septimo die advenit, non tamen die quarta praesignificata fuit. Alia insuper in critico die sit, alia autem minimè. Qui verò critici dies sint in sequentibus dicetur. Medici Hippocratem et Galenum sequentes, alio modo quam astrologi criticos dies accipiunt. Galenus tamen tertio libro de decretoriis diebus eos accipiendos esse à motu Lunae iudicat. Quoniam, ut capite quinto eiusdem libri inquit, mutationes aegritudinum à Luna proveniunt. Ut si quis in morbum inciderit, Luna in Tauro existente, mutationem dum in Leone erit, vel Scorpione, vel Aquario sentiet. Haec enim signa quadrato aspectu et oppositione Taurum aspiciunt. Sed quoniam Galenus viam Ptolemaei et rationem adhuc non assequitur: Nos rationem tradere cupientes rem ipsam aggredimur. Ptolemaeus aphorismo sexagesimo centiloquii inquit. Super aegrotis criticos inspice, ac Luna peragrationem in angulis figurae sexdecim laterum: ubi enim eos benè affectos inveneris, benè erit languenti: contra verò male ubi affectos inveneris. Si igitur secundum hanc doctrinam circulus in quatuor quadrantes dividatur: et quod signum et quaenam signi pars quadrantis finem attingat, videatur: dies in qua crisis futura est facilè dignoscetur. Cum enim Luna ad hunc angulum (angulum, scilicet eum qui quarto aspectu locum in quo Luna in morbi initio erat, aspicit) pervenerit: et tunc benè affecta fuerit, id est cum benevolis planetis aspectum habuerit, vel stellis primae vel secundae magnitudinis naturae Iovis vel Veneris iuncta fuerit, eo tempore crisis ad salutem fiet. Si autem malè affecta fuerit, quadrato vel oppositione Saturni vel Martis, aut stellis primae et secundae magnitudinis naturae eorum iuncta sit: tunc crisis non fiet, aut si fiat, ad damnum potius quam ad salutem erit: et praecipuè si calidus sit morbus, et Martem Luna aspexerit, qui caliditate sua morbum fovet. Luna autem aliquando celerius, aliquando tardius hunc angulum pervenit, quo fit, ut crisis aliquando sexquiquinto die, quando scilicet, Luna celeriter movetur: aliquando etiam sexto crisis apparere incipiat. Cum verò medio motu Luna movetur, sesquisexto die vel propè septimi diei finem morbus iudicatur. Cum aut tardius Luna movetur, crises vel octavo die vel tardius fiunt. Et quoniam in omnibus modus tenendus est, ideò crises septimo die perfectiores, quam aliis diebus fiunt. Crisis etiam laudabilis aliquando fit die quinto: tunc enim Luna propter motus velocitatem fortunata est. Quod si contingat crisim non fieri Luna in hoc primo existente. Animadvertendum est quo tempore ad oppositum loci in quo erat, tempore inceptionis morbi perveniet (Ad eum autem ut plurimum die decimoquarto pervenit.) Si enim (ut de primo angulo dictum est) bene affecta Luna fuerit: ad salutem crisis fiet. Si autem malè affecta fuerit: ad perniciem potius quam salutem fiet, aut non fiet. Id verò eo tempore advenit: quoniam locus initii morbi et locus ei oppositus qualitatibus lumine et aspectu pugnat, et contrarii sunt. Et quoniam signa quadrato aspectu sese aspicientia aliquando totis qualitatibus pugnant: quando Luna signum in quo erat in morbi insultu quadrato aspectu respicit, natura adversus morbum insurgit, et nititur expellere et evacuare quod sibi noxium est. Quare si eo tempore inferior radix una cum superiore radice occurrat: tunc optimum sit iudicium. Signa autem quadrato aspectu sese aspicientia aliquando una tantum qualitate pugnant: atque tunc in quadratis radix superior debilior est. Tertius angulus (si in secundo iudicium non fiat) considerandus venit. Quoniam Luna in hoc angulo existente, id quod ut plurimum vigesima die fit, si causae supradictae occurrant iudicium apparere incipiet. Quod si non appareat, quartus angulus, qui idem est cum morbi initio, respiciendus est: quia tunc ad locum in quo erat in morbi principio, Luna pervenit. Id aut vigesimoseptimo die et tertia unius diei parte fiet: quo in loco Luna existente, superioribus et inferioribus causis occurrentibus iudicium fiet: quo loco si non fiat, morbus in acutorum numero annumerandus non est: sed in chronicorum numerum ponendus est. Ideò iam ad Solis motum redire convenit. Sol enim morbos chronicos, ut Luna acutos suo motu moderatur. Videndum est igitur in quo signo Sol in morbi principio erat: quoniam ut de Luna diximus, quando ad primum quadratum huius loci vel oppositionem, aut secundum quadratum, aut ad locum initii morbi pervenerit: morbus iudicabitur, modo ea. Circulus ergo in quatuor aequales partes divisus, quatuor dies sive angulos criticos ostendit. Hi autem critici suos indicativos habent, qui si iterum quaelibet quarta circuli pars in duas aequales partes dividatur, invenientur: et ita totus circulus in partes aequales octo divisus erit, quarum una quaelibet gradus quinque et quadraginta comprehendit. Totus enim Zodiacus ut omnes alii circuli sphaerae gradus 360 continet, qui si in quatuor partes secantur, pars quaelibet gradus nonaginta amplectetur. Si iterum una quaelibet quarta in partes duas aequales dividatur, gradus quadraginta quinque una continebit. Luna igitur in huiuscemodi angulo animadvertenda est: cum enim ad angulum illum, qui est inter morbi initium et primum angulum criticum (secundum signorum ordinem) pervenerit, quid factura sit natura die critico, illo die monstrabit. Id autem ut plurimum quarto die fit: quia inter septimum et morbi initium medius est. In illo autem die si signa coctionis appareant, futuri iudicii cum Luna ad criticum angulum pervenerit, signum est: modò tamen causae iam dictae adsint. Si verò in primo angulo critico iudicium non fiat: cum ad medium locum primi et secundi anguli Luna pervenerit, id quod die undecimo saepe fit, an crisis decimoquarto die futura sit necne, natura ostendet. Quod si eo loco crisis non fiat, in aliis angulis indicativis et criticis ut dictum iam fuit, Luna animadvertenda est. Angulus enim qui est inter secundum angulum criticum et tertium, tertii anguli critici, indicativus angulus ad quem saepius decimo septimo die Luna pervenit. Angulus autem inter tertium angulum criticum et quartum, quarti anguli critici indicativus est: ad quem etiam vigesimocuarto die motu proprio Luna accedit. Ad haec notandum est diem certum, quo Luna ad angulos pervenit, non posse assignari. secundum enim ipsius motus celeritatem vel tarditatem aliquando citius: aliquando verò tardius eos attingit. Sed qui arithmetices non omnino ignari sunt, supputatione et calculo diem et horam, qua ad eos pervenit, facilè agnoscet. Et ideò diem et horam iudicii facilè praedicere poterit. Accidentia autem eo die futura ex fortunis vel infortuniis Lunae iudicabit. Hi dies et anguli intercidentes suos proprios habent: qui si unaquaelibet ipsarum octo partium circuli in duas aequales partes dividatur, apparebunt. Ita enim iuxta Ptolemaei doctrinam, circulus totus in partes aequales sexdecim, sive angulos divisus erit, et una quaelibet pars gradus duos et viginti cum minutis triginta continebit. Primus autem angulus, inter initium morbi et primum indicativum intercidens erit. Secundus angulus primae crisis indicativus est. Tertius verò angulus, inter indicativum et primam crisim intercidens erit. Quartus autem angulus, qui et quadratus dicitur, prima crisis est. Ita igitur inter morbi initium et primam crisim sive criticum angulum, intercidentes duo et indicativus unus erunt. Tot itaque in unaquaque reliquarum trium quartarum anguli sunt annumerandi. Quatuor ergo sunt critici dies, et totidem indicativi, ac intercidentes octo, in quibus Luna animadvertenda venit: quae etiam singulis diebus non minori negotio animadvertenda est. Eo enim die quo benè affecta fuerit, benè agetur cum aegro: sed praecipuè in huiuscemodi angulis. Haec est summa divisionis crisium, quare de his dicta sufficiant. Nos in studiosorum gratiam tabulam in fine tertii capitis primi libri apposuimus, dies criticos indicantes et intercidentes complectentem, cum indice planetarum dignitates et ipsos dies demonstrante. Cum quis ergo die, quo alicuius morbi iudicium sive crisis fiet, notum facere cupit, primò quodnam signum et quae signi pars Luna in morbi principio tenebat, inquirat: tum deinde super illud signum, et illam signi partem morbi initii indicem in signorum circulo apponat: tum demum indice criticorum dierum supra intercidentes indicativos et criticos angulos apposito: signa et signorum partes illos constituentes in directo lineae fiduciae apparebunt: quando enim ad haec signa et has signi partes Luna pervenit, intercidentes iudicati et critici dies sole clarius elucescunt. An fortunata etiam vel infortunata Luna sit ex situ illius, in dignitatum planetarum tabula his ea de causa supposita, apparet. Toto igitur morbi decursu ad hanc tabulam recurrendum est, ut quo die gravior vel levior sit morbus, facilè dignosci possit. Quae in morbis curandis, et humoribus evacuandis observanda sunt. CAP. XII. QUA RATIONE morbi, eorum causae et partes laborantes dignosci queant, in praecedentibus dictum fuit. An verò sanabiles aut insanabiles, acuti aut chronici, et quo tempore iudicari debeant, etiam anteà monstratum est. Nunc autem qua ratione curandi sunt, et quo tempore remedia sunt adhibenda ostendere convenit. Igitur ut rem paucis ostendam, notandum est corpora inferiora à superioribus regi, et praecipuè ipsius Lunae motu morbi variantur: non quod viribus et potentia reliquis praestet: sed quoniam propinquior et motu celerior est. Videmus enim crescere. Ossa in plenilunio medulla repleta: omnia tam in mari quam in terra humore aucta Luna humores crescere: veluti cum decrescit, defunt. Cancri, astaci, et ostreae in plenilunio carne sunt repleti, mare cum tumescit: humores in hominis corpore, veluti etiam in arboribus, aucti sunt. Contrarium autem in novilunio apparet. Praeterea secundum accessum et recessum Lunae in Zodiaci signis mutationes temporum fiunt. Cum enim Sol et Luna in signis calidis sunt, augetur caliditas: cum demum in frigidis, frigiditas calidum superat. Meritò igitur in humorum purgatione Lunae motus per zodiaci signa animadvertendus est. Et non Solum autem Lunae motus: verum etiam aliorum planetarum, quorum influxu humores conservantur, animadvertendus est. Saturnus enim melancholiam auget, conservat et retinet: quia cum frigidus sit et siccus, ut melancholia: ideò eam auget et retinet. Iupiter verò qui calidus est et humidus temperate, sanguini praeest, ipsumque auget. Melancholiae autem ut Saturnus, sanguini adversatur: Mars flavam bilem regit, ac gubernat, et retinet: quia ut bilis ipsa calida est et sicca: sic Mars calidus est et siccus, ac ideò eam fovet: pituitam autem sua qualitate contraria, quemadmodum Venus cum Luna bilem expellit. Cum enim Venus et Luna frigidae sint et humidae: ideo pituitam fovent et regunt. Fortitudo igitur planetarum symbolum cum humoribus habentium, in eorum evacuatione vitanda est. Sed planetarum illis adversorum fortitudo molienda est. Ut quando evacuanda est bilis, Mars in cadenti domo (non autem in angulo vel succedenti) ponendus est. Venus autem è contrario, in angulis vel succedentibus fortificanda est. Illa enim sua qualitate contraria adversus bilem naturam adiuvat, et ad illius expulsionem facultatem expultricem roborat. Si etiam in ipsius bilis evacuatione Luna una cum Venere corroboretur, naturam ad illius expulsionem fortiorem redderet. Quod si ambae, id est Venus et Luna fortificari non possunt: debilitato Marte, una corroboretur. Quando pariter Venerem viribus Mars superaverit, pituitam depellet. Cum autem melancholiam evacuare volumus, Iupiter ut eam depellere queat, fortificandus est: ne autem eam Saturnus retineat, ipsum debiliorem reddere conamus. Contraria penitus ratio in sanguine vacuando observatur. Iupiter enim debilior redditur, et Saturni vires roborantur: ne Iupiter sanguinis vacuationem prohibeat, et Saturnus iuvet. Delectus etiam in horarum electione pariter habendus est. Iovis enim hora in melancholiae evacuatione prodest: Saturni verò nocet. ac eodem modo in singulis humoribus purgandis iudicandum est. Eo tamen tempore, quo solutivum medicamentum datur, tutius est horam benevolorum planetarum quam malevolorum eligere, ac in omnibus melius est Saturni et Martis horas, ac Lunae cum eis applicationes fugere. Planetae item corporis humani partes quasdam respiciunt: utpote eas quae naturis suis conveniunt. Ut quia Luna frigida est et humida, cerebrum respicit. Venus autem quae pariter temperate humida est testiculos conservat. Mercurius communis est et convertibilis. Ideò pulmones gubernat. Sol qui calorem conservativum adeptus est, suo influxu cor moderatur. Mars verò quoniam calidus est et siccus immoderate, vesicam felleam et renes respicit et moderatur. Hepar autem caliditate et humiditate Iovis, quemadmodum frigiditate et siccitate Saturni lien regitur. Eo igitur tempore quo illi planetae dominantur, partes illae evacuandae non sunt: humorem enim noxium retinerent, et curationem impedirent. Eo tamen tempore quo fortes ac fortunati in caelo sunt, illas partes roborare convenientissimum erit. Ad rem igitur unde digressi sumus, accedamus. Motum Lunae nostri corporis humores sequuntur. In prima enim et tertia Lunae hebdomadibus, hoc est à Solis et Lunae congressu sive conjunctione ad primam quadraturam, et ab oppositione sive plenilunio ad quadraturam secundam, à centro ad circumferentiam humores moventur: et ideò sanguinis missio, balnea, stupae et medicamenta quaecunque à centro ad circumferentiam humores ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. In secunda verò et quarta Lunae hebdomadibus id est, à prima quadratura Lunae ad eius cum Sole oppositionem sive plenilunium, humores à circumferentia ad centrum moventur: et ideo medicamenta quae humores à circumferentia ad centrum ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. AVTHO. CLAV. DARIOTO MEDI. 99 git ac gubernat, et retinet: quia ut bilis ipsa calida est et sicca: sic Mars calidus est et siccus, ac ideò eam fovet: pituitam autem sua qualitate contraria, quemadmodum Venus cum Luna bilem expellit. Cum enim Venus et Luna frigidae sint et humidae: ideo pituitam fovent et regunt. Fortitudo igitur planetarum symbolum cum humoribus habentium, in eorum evacuatione vitanda est. Sed planetarum illis adversorum fortitudo molienda est. Ut quando evacuanda est bilis, Mars in cadenti domo (non autem in angulo vel succedenti) ponendus est. Venus autem è contrario, in angulis vel succedentibus fortificanda est. Illa enim sua qualitate contraria adversus bilem naturam adiuvat, et ad illius expulsionem facultatem expultricem roborat. Si etiam in ipsius bilis evacuatione Luna una cum Venere corroboretur, naturam ad illius expulsionem fortiorem redderet. Quod si ambae, id est Venus et Luna fortificari non possunt: debilitato Marte, una corroboretur. Quando pariter Venerem viribus Mars superaverit, pituitam depellet. Cum autem melancholiam evacuare volumus, Iupiter ut eam depellere queat, fortificandus est: ne autem eam Saturnus retineat, ipsum debiliorem reddere conamus. Contraria penitus ratio in sanguine vacuando observatur. Iupiter enim debilior redditur, et Saturni vires roborantur: ne Iupiter sanguinis vacuationem prohibeat, et Saturnus iuvet. Delectus etiam in horarum electione pariter habendus est. Iovis enim hora in melancholiae evacuatione prodest: Saturni verò nocet. ac eodem modo in singulis humoribus purgandis iudicandum est. Eo tamen tempore, quo solutivum medicamentum datur, tutius est horam benevolorum planetarum quam malevolorum eligere, ac in omnibus melius est Saturni et Martis horas, ac Lunae cum eis applicationes fugere. Planetae item corporis humani partes quasdam respiciunt: utpote eas quae naturis suis conveniunt. Ut quia Luna frigida est et humida, cerebrum respicit. Venus autem quae pariter temperate humida est testiculos conservat. Mercurius communis est et convertibilis. Ideò pulmones gubernat. Sol qui calorem conservativum adeptus est, suo influxu cor moderatur. Mars verò quoniam calidus est et siccus immoderate, vesicam felleam et renes respicit et moderatur. Hepar autem caliditate et humiditate Iovis, quemadmodum frigiditate et siccitate Saturni lien regitur. Eo igitur tempore quo illi planetae dominantur, partes illae evacuandae non sunt: humorem enim noxium retinerent, et curationem impedirent. Eo tamen tempore quo fortes ac fortunati in caelo sunt, illas partes roborare convenientissimum erit. Ad rem igitur unde digressi sumus, accedamus. Motum Lunae nostri corporis humores sequuntur. In prima enim et tertia Lunae hebdomadibus, hoc est à Solis et Lunae congressu sive conjunctione ad primam quadraturam, et ab oppositione sive plenilunio ad quadraturam secundam, à centro ad circumferentiam humores moventur: et ideò sanguinis missio, balnea, stupae et medicamenta quaecunque à centro ad circumferentiam humores ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. In secunda verò et quarta Lunae hebdomadibus id est, à prima quadratura Lunae ad eius cum Sole oppositionem sive plenilunium, humores à circumferentia ad centrum moventur: et ideo medicamenta quae humores à circumferentia ad centrum ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. 100 DE MORBIS ET DIEBUS CRITIC. lutivum medicamentum datur, tutius est horam benevolorum planetarum quam malevolorum eligere, ac in omnibus melius est Saturni et Martis horas, ac Lunae cum eis applicationes fugere. Planetae item corporis humani partes quasdam respiciunt: utpote eas quae naturis suis conveniunt. Ut quia Luna frigida est et humida, cerebrum respicit. Venus autem quae pariter temperate humida est testiculos conservat. Mercurius communis est et convertibilis. Ideò pulmones gubernat. Sol qui calorem conservativum adeptus est, suo influxu cor moderatur. Mars verò quoniam calidus est et siccus immoderate, vesicam felleam et renes respicit et moderatur. Hepar autem caliditate et humiditate Iovis, quemadmodum frigiditate et siccitate Saturni lien regitur. Eo igitur tempore quo illi planetae dominantur, partes illae evacuandae non sunt: humorem enim noxium retinerent, et curationem impedirent. Eo tamen tempore quo fortes ac fortunati in caelo sunt, illas partes roborare convenientissimum erit. Ad rem igitur unde digressi sumus, accedamus. Motum Lunae nostri corporis humores sequuntur. In prima enim et tertia Lunae hebdomadibus, hoc est à Solis et Lunae congressu sive conjunctione ad primam quadraturam, et ab oppositione sive plenilunio ad quadraturam secundam, à centro ad circumferentiam humores moventur: et ideò sanguinis missio, balnea, stupae et medicamenta quaecunque à centro ad circumferentiam humores ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. In secunda verò et quarta Lunae hebdomadibus id est, à prima quadratura Lunae ad eius cum Sole oppositionem sive plenilunium, humores à circumferentia ad centrum moventur: et ideo medicamenta quae humores à circumferentia ad centrum ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. tr di so me Pre ss Iule alic nes 7200

If the lord of the ascendant is joined to the lord of the eighth house, that is, of death, and receives him: and if the lord of the eighth or of death was previously retrograde, but begins to go direct, and is still at the beginning of his direct motion, it signifies life (although without reception it would portend death). Likewise, if there is a translation of light from the Moon through Venus to the Sun, and to Jupiter, that is, if the Moon aspects Venus, Venus the Sun, and the Sun Jupiter: and Jupiter is situated in the ascendant or in the ninth house, he will be the lord of the figure or almuten, and this presages life. If, moreover, Venus or Mercury transfers the Moon's light to Mars, or the Sun: and Mars, having received it, transfers it to Jupiter, life is signified by Jupiter as receiver (even if Mars' conjunction is perverse), provided, however, that Jupiter is in the sky. Dominus insuper ascendentis fortis ac fortunatus, et in aliquo angulorum situs, et quando infortunia felicitates non superant, salutis signum ostendit. A Luna item à caeli figura et ab omnibus partibus, praecipuè à parte fortunae salutis signa sumuntur. Si enim Luna benè affecta fuerit, et in angulis vel succedentibus sita sit, et in sui incremento ac morbi principio cum Marte non fuerit: ac si pars fortunae et aliae partes, praecipuè pars vitae benè collocatae fuerint et fortes, salutem futuram ostendunt. Cum denique Iupiter trino aut sextili aspectu Solem respicit, salutis spem auget. Antequam autem iudicium proferatur, animadvertendum est an prosperitates infortunia superant, aut contra. Si enim aequales fuerint, difficillimum est iudicium: diligenter ideò consideranda sunt. An acutus vel chronicus morbus sit. CAP. X. POSTEA QUAM an curabilis sit morbus necne, monstratum est. Si curabilem esse agnoscamus: reliquum est ut an acutus sit vel chronicus, id est, an brevis vel longus, videamus. Quod ut agnoscamus sexta domus, eius dominus, Luna, dominus ascendentis, planeta à quo separatur, et ea cui applicat animadvertendi sunt. Si enim sextae domus signum ex fixorum numero sit, et eius dominus sit in signo fixo situs, vel planeta gravis (ut sunt Saturnus et Iupiter) fuerit, morbi longitudinem praenuntiant. Si autem in mobilibus signis collocatus fuerit, et in sexta mobile signum fuerit, morbi brevitatem facit. Si denique fixorum et mobilium loco, communia sive media adsunt, morbi residuam timere iubent. Simili via et ratione de planeta à quo separatur dominus ascendentis iudicandum est. Luna etiam animadvertenda est. Si enim in suo motu tardior sit, et lumine crescat, morbi augmentum denuntiat: ut etiam si in morbi principio et in sui incremento cum Marte et in decremento cum Saturno sit: morbi perniciem eiusque longitudinem praesagit. Idem etiam praestat si in signo fixo et infortunata, id est malè collocata sit. Quando item in morbi principio Luna à combustione exit, infirmitas crescit, quousque Luna ad loci in quo erat, in morbi insultu oppositionem veniat, quo in loco si fortunatos planetas inveniat, morbus iudicabitur. Si verò infortunatos aut morietur aeger aut diuturnior morbus erit. Sed de his latius in sequentibus, cum de crisibus fiet sermo, dicemus. Dominus item domus Lunae animadvertendus est, qui si infortunatus sit, morbi longitudinem arguit. Morbi etiam longitudo ut Hali inquit, à domini ascendentis cum fortunatis vel infortunatis vicinitate sumitur. Si enim ascendentis dominus ad planetam fortunatum subito coniunctione vel aspectu pervenit, brevem morbum facit: si autem tarde, longum. Partes item fortunae, vitae, mortis et planetae interficientis (quibus omnibus fortunae pars antecellit) animadvertendae sunt. Quando itaque partes illae benè collocatae sunt, et in signis mobilibus, morbi brevitatem: si autem malè et in signis fixis, longitudinem praenuntiat. Tempus autem longitudinis morbi invenitur, si gradus qui sunt inter applicationem significatorum cum fortunatis numerantur, et pro gradu quolibet dies una sumatur, si signum mobile sit: si verò sit fixum, hebdomadam vel mensem vel annum: si autem commune sit, diem vel hebdomadam vel mensem dabimus: quia cum significatores fortunatis applicant, tunc morbus iudicatur. De criticis indicativis, et intercidentibus diebus, ac eorum inventione. CAP. XI. SUPEREST nunc ut de criticis diebus ac eorum indicativis et intercidentibus quidpiam dicamus. Quae res ut clarius intelligatur, quid sit crisis initio dicendum est. Omnis enim quae à ratione de aliqua re institutio suscipitur, à definitione debet proficisci, ut intelligatur quid sit de quo disputatur. Crisin igitur Galenus in commentario 13. sectione secunda aphorismorum et commentario 230. et libro primo epidemion commentario 3. et tertio prognosticorum commentario primo, dicit esse vehementem in morbis mutationem ad salutem vel mortem. Non me latet dictionem iudicium à medicis multis sumi modis. Sed nunc in ea significatione à Galeno in iam dictis locis accepta, capitur: nempe pro subita mutatione in morbo ad salutem vel ad mortem. Crisis autem alia est perfecta, alia imperfecta. Perfecta est quando morbus integre et absolute iudicatur. Eaque duplex, perfecta laudabilis, cum scilicet, morbus ad salutem iudicatur: et perfecta illaudabilis, cum morbus integre iudicatur, sed ad mortem. Imperfecta est quando integre morbus non iudicatur: sed ex eo quidpiam relinquitur, et residuam facit: idque dupliciter. Vel enim morbus paulatim ad mortem tendit, et mala iudicatio dicitur: vel paulatim ad salutem accedit, et laudabilis imperfecta vocatur. Crisium item alia est salva, quae sine magnis et perniciosis accidentibus sit. Alia dubia, quae scilicet, cum illis advenit. Alia denique est iudicata, ut quando die quarta signa coctionis apparent, morbum septimo die iudicaturum denuntiant. Non iudicata alia, ut illa quae septimo die advenit, non tamen die quarta praesignificata fuit. Alia insuper in critico die sit, alia autem minimè. Qui verò critici dies sint in sequentibus dicetur. Medici Hippocratem et Galenum sequentes, alio modo quam astrologi criticos dies accipiunt. Galenus tamen tertio libro de decretoriis diebus eos accipiendos esse à motu Lunae iudicat. Quoniam, ut capite quinto eiusdem libri inquit, mutationes aegritudinum à Luna proveniunt. Ut si quis in morbum inciderit, Luna in Tauro existente, mutationem dum in Leone erit, vel Scorpione, vel Aquario sentiet. Haec enim signa quadrato aspectu et oppositione Taurum aspiciunt. Sed quoniam Galenus viam Ptolemaei et rationem adhuc non assequitur: Nos rationem tradere cupientes rem ipsam aggredimur. Ptolemaeus aphorismo sexagesimo centiloquii inquit. Super aegrotis criticos inspice, ac Luna peragrationem in angulis figurae sexdecim laterum: ubi enim eos benè affectos inveneris, benè erit languenti: contra verò male ubi affectos inveneris. Si igitur secundum hanc doctrinam circulus in quatuor quadrantes dividatur: et quod signum et quaenam signi pars quadrantis finem attingat, videatur: dies in qua crisis futura est facilè dignoscetur. Cum enim Luna ad hunc angulum (angulum, scilicet eum qui quarto aspectu locum in quo Luna in morbi initio erat, aspicit) pervenerit: et tunc benè affecta fuerit, id est cum benevolis planetis aspectum habuerit, vel stellis primae vel secundae magnitudinis naturae Iovis vel Veneris iuncta fuerit, eo tempore crisis ad salutem fiet. Si autem malè affecta fuerit, quadrato vel oppositione Saturni vel Martis, aut stellis primae et secundae magnitudinis naturae eorum iuncta sit: tunc crisis non fiet, aut si fiat, ad damnum potius quam ad salutem erit: et praecipuè si calidus sit morbus, et Martem Luna aspexerit, qui caliditate sua morbum fovet. Luna autem aliquando celerius, aliquando tardius hunc angulum pervenit, quo fit, ut crisis aliquando sexquiquinto die, quando scilicet, Luna celeriter movetur: aliquando etiam sexto crisis apparere incipiat. Cum verò medio motu Luna movetur, sesquisexto die vel propè septimi diei finem morbus iudicatur. Cum aut tardius Luna movetur, crises vel octavo die vel tardius fiunt. Et quoniam in omnibus modus tenendus est, ideò crises septimo die perfectiores, quam aliis diebus fiunt. Crisis etiam laudabilis aliquando fit die quinto: tunc enim Luna propter motus velocitatem fortunata est. Quod si contingat crisim non fieri Luna in hoc primo existente. Animadvertendum est quo tempore ad oppositum loci in quo erat, tempore inceptionis morbi perveniet (Ad eum autem ut plurimum die decimoquarto pervenit.) Si enim (ut de primo angulo dictum est) bene affecta Luna fuerit: ad salutem crisis fiet. Si autem malè affecta fuerit: ad perniciem potius quam salutem fiet, aut non fiet. Id verò eo tempore advenit: quoniam locus initii morbi et locus ei oppositus qualitatibus lumine et aspectu pugnat, et contrarii sunt. Et quoniam signa quadrato aspectu sese aspicientia aliquando totis qualitatibus pugnant: quando Luna signum in quo erat in morbi insultu quadrato aspectu respicit, natura adversus morbum insurgit, et nititur expellere et evacuare quod sibi noxium est. Quare si eo tempore inferior radix una cum superiore radice occurrat: tunc optimum sit iudicium. Signa autem quadrato aspectu sese aspicientia aliquando una tantum qualitate pugnant: atque tunc in quadratis radix superior debilior est. Tertius angulus (si in secundo iudicium non fiat) considerandus venit. Quoniam Luna in hoc angulo existente, id quod ut plurimum vigesima die fit, si causae supradictae occurrant iudicium apparere incipiet. Quod si non appareat, quartus angulus, qui idem est cum morbi initio, respiciendus est: quia tunc ad locum in quo erat in morbi principio, Luna pervenit. Id aut vigesimoseptimo die et tertia unius diei parte fiet: quo in loco Luna existente, superioribus et inferioribus causis occurrentibus iudicium fiet: quo loco si non fiat, morbus in acutorum numero annumerandus non est: sed in chronicorum numerum ponendus est. Ideò iam ad Solis motum redire convenit. Sol enim morbos chronicos, ut Luna acutos suo motu moderatur. Videndum est igitur in quo signo Sol in morbi principio erat: quoniam ut de Luna diximus, quando ad primum quadratum huius loci vel oppositionem, aut secundum quadratum, aut ad locum initii morbi pervenerit: morbus iudicabitur, modo ea. Circulus ergo in quatuor aequales partes divisus, quatuor dies sive angulos criticos ostendit. Hi autem critici suos indicativos habent, qui si iterum quaelibet quarta circuli pars in duas aequales partes dividatur, invenientur: et ita totus circulus in partes aequales octo divisus erit, quarum una quaelibet gradus quinque et quadraginta comprehendit. Totus enim Zodiacus ut omnes alii circuli sphaerae gradus 360 continet, qui si in quatuor partes secantur, pars quaelibet gradus nonaginta amplectetur. Si iterum una quaelibet quarta in partes duas aequales dividatur, gradus quadraginta quinque una continebit. Luna igitur in huiuscemodi angulo animadvertenda est: cum enim ad angulum illum, qui est inter morbi initium et primum angulum criticum (secundum signorum ordinem) pervenerit, quid factura sit natura die critico, illo die monstrabit. Id autem ut plurimum quarto die fit: quia inter septimum et morbi initium medius est. In illo autem die si signa coctionis appareant, futuri iudicii cum Luna ad criticum angulum pervenerit, signum est: modò tamen causae iam dictae adsint. Si verò in primo angulo critico iudicium non fiat: cum ad medium locum primi et secundi anguli Luna pervenerit, id quod die undecimo saepe fit, an crisis decimoquarto die futura sit necne, natura ostendet. Quod si eo loco crisis non fiat, in aliis angulis indicativis et criticis ut dictum iam fuit, Luna animadvertenda est. Angulus enim qui est inter secundum angulum criticum et tertium, tertii anguli critici, indicativus angulus ad quem saepius decimo septimo die Luna pervenit. Angulus autem inter tertium angulum criticum et quartum, quarti anguli critici indicativus est: ad quem etiam vigesimocuarto die motu proprio Luna accedit. Ad haec notandum est diem certum, quo Luna ad angulos pervenit, non posse assignari. secundum enim ipsius motus celeritatem vel tarditatem aliquando citius: aliquando verò tardius eos attingit. Sed qui arithmetices non omnino ignari sunt, supputatione et calculo diem et horam, qua ad eos pervenit, facilè agnoscet. Et ideò diem et horam iudicii facilè praedicere poterit. Accidentia autem eo die futura ex fortunis vel infortuniis Lunae iudicabit. Hi dies et anguli intercidentes suos proprios habent: qui si unaquaelibet ipsarum octo partium circuli in duas aequales partes dividatur, apparebunt. Ita enim iuxta Ptolemaei doctrinam, circulus totus in partes aequales sexdecim, sive angulos divisus erit, et una quaelibet pars gradus duos et viginti cum minutis triginta continebit. Primus autem angulus, inter initium morbi et primum indicativum intercidens erit. Secundus angulus primae crisis indicativus est. Tertius verò angulus, inter indicativum et primam crisim intercidens erit. Quartus autem angulus, qui et quadratus dicitur, prima crisis est. Ita igitur inter morbi initium et primam crisim sive criticum angulum, intercidentes duo et indicativus unus erunt. Tot itaque in unaquaque reliquarum trium quartarum anguli sunt annumerandi. Quatuor ergo sunt critici dies, et totidem indicativi, ac intercidentes octo, in quibus Luna animadvertenda venit: quae etiam singulis diebus non minori negotio animadvertenda est. Eo enim die quo benè affecta fuerit, benè agetur cum aegro: sed praecipuè in huiuscemodi angulis. Haec est summa divisionis crisium, quare de his dicta sufficiant. Nos in studiosorum gratiam tabulam in fine tertii capitis primi libri apposuimus, dies criticos indicantes et intercidentes complectentem, cum indice planetarum dignitates et ipsos dies demonstrante. Cum quis ergo die, quo alicuius morbi iudicium sive crisis fiet, notum facere cupit, primò quodnam signum et quae signi pars Luna in morbi principio tenebat, inquirat: tum deinde super illud signum, et illam signi partem morbi initii indicem in signorum circulo apponat: tum demum indice criticorum dierum supra intercidentes indicativos et criticos angulos apposito: signa et signorum partes illos constituentes in directo lineae fiduciae apparebunt: quando enim ad haec signa et has signi partes Luna pervenit, intercidentes iudicati et critici dies sole clarius elucescunt. An fortunata etiam vel infortunata Luna sit ex situ illius, in dignitatum planetarum tabula his ea de causa supposita, apparet. Toto igitur morbi decursu ad hanc tabulam recurrendum est, ut quo die gravior vel levior sit morbus, facilè dignosci possit. Quae in morbis curandis, et humoribus evacuandis observanda sunt. CAP. XII. QUA RATIONE morbi, eorum causae et partes laborantes dignosci queant, in praecedentibus dictum fuit. An verò sanabiles aut insanabiles, acuti aut chronici, et quo tempore iudicari debeant, etiam anteà monstratum est. Nunc autem qua ratione curandi sunt, et quo tempore remedia sunt adhibenda ostendere convenit. Igitur ut rem paucis ostendam, notandum est corpora inferiora à superioribus regi, et praecipuè ipsius Lunae motu morbi variantur: non quod viribus et potentia reliquis praestet: sed quoniam propinquior et motu celerior est. Videmus enim crescere. Ossa in plenilunio medulla repleta: omnia tam in mari quam in terra humore aucta Luna humores crescere: veluti cum decrescit, defunt. Cancri, astaci, et ostreae in plenilunio carne sunt repleti, mare cum tumescit: humores in hominis corpore, veluti etiam in arboribus, aucti sunt. Contrarium autem in novilunio apparet. Praeterea secundum accessum et recessum Lunae in Zodiaci signis mutationes temporum fiunt. Cum enim Sol et Luna in signis calidis sunt, augetur caliditas: cum demum in frigidis, frigiditas calidum superat. Meritò igitur in humorum purgatione Lunae motus per zodiaci signa animadvertendus est. Et non Solum autem Lunae motus: verum etiam aliorum planetarum, quorum influxu humores conservantur, animadvertendus est. Saturnus enim melancholiam auget, conservat et retinet: quia cum frigidus sit et siccus, ut melancholia: ideò eam auget et retinet. Iupiter verò qui calidus est et humidus temperate, sanguini praeest, ipsumque auget. Melancholiae autem ut Saturnus, sanguini adversatur: Mars flavam bilem regit, ac gubernat, et retinet: quia ut bilis ipsa calida est et sicca: sic Mars calidus est et siccus, ac ideò eam fovet: pituitam autem sua qualitate contraria, quemadmodum Venus cum Luna bilem expellit. Cum enim Venus et Luna frigidae sint et humidae: ideo pituitam fovent et regunt. Fortitudo igitur planetarum symbolum cum humoribus habentium, in eorum evacuatione vitanda est. Sed planetarum illis adversorum fortitudo molienda est. Ut quando evacuanda est bilis, Mars in cadenti domo (non autem in angulo vel succedenti) ponendus est. Venus autem è contrario, in angulis vel succedentibus fortificanda est. Illa enim sua qualitate contraria adversus bilem naturam adiuvat, et ad illius expulsionem facultatem expultricem roborat. Si etiam in ipsius bilis evacuatione Luna una cum Venere corroboretur, naturam ad illius expulsionem fortiorem redderet. Quod si ambae, id est Venus et Luna fortificari non possunt: debilitato Marte, una corroboretur. Quando pariter Venerem viribus Mars superaverit, pituitam depellet. Cum autem melancholiam evacuare volumus, Iupiter ut eam depellere queat, fortificandus est: ne autem eam Saturnus retineat, ipsum debiliorem reddere conamus. Contraria penitus ratio in sanguine vacuando observatur. Iupiter enim debilior redditur, et Saturni vires roborantur: ne Iupiter sanguinis vacuationem prohibeat, et Saturnus iuvet. Delectus etiam in horarum electione pariter habendus est. Iovis enim hora in melancholiae evacuatione prodest: Saturni verò nocet. ac eodem modo in singulis humoribus purgandis iudicandum est. Eo tamen tempore, quo solutivum medicamentum datur, tutius est horam benevolorum planetarum quam malevolorum eligere, ac in omnibus melius est Saturni et Martis horas, ac Lunae cum eis applicationes fugere. Planetae item corporis humani partes quasdam respiciunt: utpote eas quae naturis suis conveniunt. Ut quia Luna frigida est et humida, cerebrum respicit. Venus autem quae pariter temperate humida est testiculos conservat. Mercurius communis est et convertibilis. Ideò pulmones gubernat. Sol qui calorem conservativum adeptus est, suo influxu cor moderatur. Mars verò quoniam calidus est et siccus immoderate, vesicam felleam et renes respicit et moderatur. Hepar autem caliditate et humiditate Iovis, quemadmodum frigiditate et siccitate Saturni lien regitur. Eo igitur tempore quo illi planetae dominantur, partes illae evacuandae non sunt: humorem enim noxium retinerent, et curationem impedirent. Eo tamen tempore quo fortes ac fortunati in caelo sunt, illas partes roborare convenientissimum erit. Ad rem igitur unde digressi sumus, accedamus. Motum Lunae nostri corporis humores sequuntur. In prima enim et tertia Lunae hebdomadibus, hoc est à Solis et Lunae congressu sive conjunctione ad primam quadraturam, et ab oppositione sive plenilunio ad quadraturam secundam, à centro ad circumferentiam humores moventur: et ideò sanguinis missio, balnea, stupae et medicamenta quaecunque à centro ad circumferentiam humores ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. In secunda verò et quarta Lunae hebdomadibus id est, à prima quadratura Lunae ad eius cum Sole oppositionem sive plenilunium, humores à circumferentia ad centrum moventur: et ideo medicamenta quae humores à circumferentia ad centrum ducere nata sunt, in his hebdomadibus conveniunt. tr di so me Pre ss Iule alic nes 7200

Moreover, if the lord of the ascendant is strong and fortunate, and situated in one of the angles, and when misfortunes do not overcome felicities, it shows a sign of health. Likewise, from the Moon, from the figure of the sky, and from all parts, especially from the Part of Fortune, signs of health are taken. For if the Moon is well-affected, and situated in angles or succedent houses, and not with Mars at its increase and at the beginning of the illness: and if the Part of Fortune and other parts, especially the Part of Life, are well-placed and strong, they show future health. Finally, when Jupiter aspects the Sun with a trine or sextile aspect, it increases the hope of recovery. Before judgment is pronounced, however, it must be observed whether prosperities overcome misfortunes, or the reverse. For if they are equal, the judgment is very difficult: therefore, they must be diligently considered.

CHAPTER X. AFTER it has been shown whether the disease is curable or not. If we recognize it to be curable, it remains for us to see whether it is acute or chronic, that is, whether short or long. To ascertain this, the sixth house, its lord, the Moon, the lord of the ascendant, the planet from which it separates, and the planet to which it applies, must be observed. For if the sign of the sixth house is among the fixed signs, and its lord is situated in a fixed sign, or if it is a heavy planet (such as Saturn and Jupiter), they portend a long duration of the illness. But if it is placed in mutable signs, and there is a mutable sign in the sixth, it makes the illness short. If, finally, instead of fixed and mutable, common or medium signs are present, they warn to fear a lingering illness.

In a similar way and by the same reasoning, judgment must be made concerning the planet from which the lord of the ascendant separates. The Moon must also be observed. For if it is slower in its motion and increases in light, it portends an increase in the illness: as also if at the beginning of the illness and at its increase it is with Mars, and at its decrease with Saturn, it presages the destruction of the illness and its long duration. The same also happens if it is in a fixed sign and unfortunate, that is, badly placed. When the Moon also emerges from combustion at the beginning of the illness, the infirmity increases until the Moon reaches the opposition of the place where it was at the onset of the illness; in which place, if it finds fortunate planets, the illness will be judged [to improve]. But if unfortunate ones, the patient will either die or the illness will be more prolonged. But we will speak more broadly about these things later, when we discuss crises.

The lord of the Moon's house must also be observed; if he is unfortunate, it indicates a long duration of the illness. The length of the illness, as Hali says, is also taken from the proximity of the lord of the ascendant to benefics or malefics. For if the lord of the ascendant reaches a fortunate planet by sudden conjunction or aspect, it makes the illness short; but if slowly, long. The Parts of Fortune, Life, Death, and the Killing Planet (among which the Part of Fortune excels all others) must also be observed. Therefore, when these parts are well-placed and in mutable signs, they portend a short illness; but if badly placed and in fixed signs, a long one. The time of the illness's duration is found if the degrees between the application of the significators with the benefics are counted, and for each degree one day is taken if the sign is mutable; but if it is fixed, we will give a week or a month or a year; if it is common, a day or a week or a month: because when the significators apply to benefics, then the illness is judged.

CHAPTER XI. It remains now for us to say something about critical days and their indicative and intercident days. So that this matter may be more clearly understood, it must first be stated what a crisis is. For every institution that is undertaken by reason concerning some matter ought to proceed from a definition, so that it may be understood what is being discussed. Galen, therefore, in commentary 13, second section of the Aphorisms, and commentary 230, and in the first book of Epidemics, commentary 3, and the third of Prognostics, first commentary, says that a crisis is a vehement change in diseases towards health or death. It does not escape me that the word 'judgment' is taken by many physicians in various ways. But now it is taken in that sense accepted by Galen in the places already mentioned: namely, for a sudden change in the disease towards health or death. A crisis, moreover, is either perfect or imperfect. Perfect is when the disease is judged completely and absolutely. And this is twofold: perfect laudable, when, namely, the disease is judged towards health; and perfect unlaudable, when the disease is judged completely, but towards death. Imperfect is when the disease is not judged completely: but something remains from it, and it causes a residue; and this in two ways. For the disease gradually tends towards death, and is called a bad judgment; or it gradually approaches health, and is called a laudable imperfect crisis.

Of crises, some are safe, which occur without great and pernicious accidents. Others are doubtful, which, namely, come with such accidents. Still others are judged, as when on the fourth day signs of concoction appear, they announce that the disease will be judged on the seventh day. Others are unjudged, as those that arrive on the seventh day, but were not pre-signified on the fourth day. Moreover, some occur on a critical day, others not at all. Which days are critical will be said in the following. Physicians following Hippocrates and Galen understand critical days differently than astrologers. Galen, however, in the third book on decretory days, judges that they are to be taken from the Moon's motion. For, as he says in the fifth chapter of the same book, changes in illnesses arise from the Moon. For example, if someone falls ill when the Moon is in Taurus, they will feel a change when it is in Leo, or Scorpio, or Aquarius. For these signs aspect Taurus with a square aspect and opposition. But since Galen does not yet follow Ptolemy's path and reasoning, we, wishing to provide the reasoning, approach the matter itself. Ptolemy says in the sixtieth aphorism of the Centiloquium: 'Observe the critical days for the sick, and the Moon's peregrination in the angles of a sixteen-sided figure: for where you find them well-affected, it will be well for the sick; but conversely, badly where you find them ill-affected.' If, therefore, according to this doctrine, the circle is divided into four quadrants: and it is seen what sign and what part of the sign reaches the end of the quadrant, the day on which the crisis will occur will be easily recognized.

For when the Moon reaches this angle (namely, the angle which aspects with a square aspect the place where the Moon was at the beginning of the illness): and then is well-affected, that is, has an aspect with benevolent planets, or is joined to stars of the first or second magnitude of the nature of Jupiter or Venus, at that time the crisis will be towards health. But if it is ill-affected, by a square or opposition of Saturn or Mars, or joined to stars of the first and second magnitude of their nature: then the crisis will not occur, or if it does, it will be to harm rather than to health; and especially if the disease is hot, and the Moon aspects Mars, who fosters the disease with his heat. The Moon, however, sometimes reaches this angle more quickly, sometimes more slowly, which means that the crisis sometimes begins to appear on the fifth day and a half, when, namely, the Moon moves quickly; sometimes even on the sixth. But when the Moon moves with a medium motion, the disease is judged on the sixth and a half day or near the end of the seventh day. But when the Moon moves more slowly, crises occur on the eighth day or later. And since moderation must be observed in all things, therefore crises on the seventh day are more perfect than on other days. A laudable crisis also sometimes occurs on the fifth day: for then the Moon is fortunate due to the speed of its motion. If it happens that a crisis does not occur with the Moon in this first position, it must be observed at what time it will reach the opposite of the place where it was at the time of the illness's inception (it usually reaches it on the fourteenth day). For if (as was said of the first angle) the Moon is well-affected: the crisis will be towards health. But if it is ill-affected: it will be towards harm rather than health, or it will not occur.

This happens at that time because the place of the illness's inception and the place opposite to it contend in qualities, light, and aspect, and are contrary. And because signs aspecting each other with a square aspect sometimes contend with all their qualities: when the Moon aspects with a square aspect the sign in which it was at the onset of the illness, nature rises up against the disease and strives to expel and evacuate what is harmful to it. Therefore, if at that time the inferior root occurs together with the superior root, then the judgment is excellent. However, signs aspecting each other with a square aspect sometimes contend with only one quality: and then in squares the superior root is weaker. The third angle (if judgment is not made in the second) comes to be considered. For when the Moon is in this angle, which usually happens on the twentieth day, if the aforementioned causes occur, judgment will begin to appear. But if it does not appear, the fourth angle, which is the same as the beginning of the illness, must be looked at: because then the Moon reaches the place where it was at the beginning of the illness. This will happen on the twenty-seventh day and a third part of one day: in which place, with the Moon existing and the superior and inferior causes occurring, judgment will be made: if judgment is not made in this place, the disease is not to be counted among acute ones, but is to be placed in the number of chronic ones. Therefore, it is now appropriate to return to the Sun's motion. For the Sun moderates chronic diseases by its motion, just as the Moon moderates acute ones. It must therefore be seen in what sign the Sun was at the beginning of the illness: for, as we said of the Moon, when it reaches the first square of this place or the opposition, or the second square, or the place of the illness's inception, the disease will be judged, provided those things are present.

The circle, therefore, divided into four equal parts, shows four critical days or angles. These critical days have their indicative days, which will be found if each fourth part of the circle is again divided into two equal parts: and thus the whole circle will be divided into eight equal parts, each of which comprehends forty-five degrees. For the entire Zodiac, like all other circles of the sphere, contains 360 degrees, which if divided into four parts, each part will embrace ninety degrees. If again each fourth part is divided into two equal parts, each will contain forty-five degrees. The Moon, therefore, must be observed in such an angle: for when it reaches that angle, which is between the beginning of the illness and the first critical angle (according to the order of the signs), what nature will do on the critical day, it will show on that day. This usually happens on the fourth day: because it is midway between the seventh and the beginning of the illness. On that day, if signs of concoction appear, it is a sign of future judgment when the Moon reaches the critical angle, provided, however, that the already mentioned causes are present. But if judgment is not made in the first critical angle: when the Moon reaches the midpoint between the first and second angles, which often happens on the eleventh day, nature will show whether a crisis will occur on the fourteenth day or not. If a crisis does not occur in that place, the Moon must be observed in the other indicative and critical angles, as has already been said. For the angle which is between the second critical angle and the third, is the indicative angle of the third critical angle, to which the Moon most often arrives on the seventeenth day. The angle between the third critical angle and the fourth is the indicative angle of the fourth critical angle, to which the Moon also arrives by its own motion on the twenty-fourth day. To these points, it must be noted that a certain day on which the Moon reaches the angles cannot be assigned. For according to the speed or slowness of its motion, it sometimes reaches them sooner, sometimes later. But those who are not entirely ignorant of arithmetic will easily recognize the day and hour when it arrives at them by calculation and reckoning. And therefore, they will easily be able to predict the day and hour of judgment. The events that will occur on that day will be judged from the Moon's fortunes or misfortunes. These intercident days and angles have their own specific ones: which will appear if each of those eight parts of the circle is divided into two equal parts. Thus, according to Ptolemy's doctrine, the entire circle will be divided into sixteen equal parts or angles, and each part will contain two degrees and twenty-two and a half minutes. The first angle, moreover, will be intercident between the beginning of the illness and the first indicative. The second angle is the indicative of the first crisis. The third angle, however, will be intercident between the indicative and the first crisis. The fourth angle, which is also called the square, is the first crisis. Thus, between the beginning of the illness and the first crisis or critical angle, there will be two intercident and one indicative angle. So many angles are to be counted in each of the remaining three quarters. Therefore, there are four critical days, and as many indicative, and eight intercident days, in which the Moon must be observed: which must also be observed with no less diligence on individual days.

For on that day when it is well-affected, the patient will fare well; but especially in such angles. This is the sum of the division of crises, therefore let what has been said about them suffice. For the benefit of students, we have appended a table at the end of the third chapter of the first book, embracing critical and intercident days, with an index demonstrating the dignities of the planets and the days themselves. Therefore, when someone wishes to know the day on which the judgment or crisis of any disease will occur, let him first inquire what sign and what part of the sign the Moon occupied at the beginning of the illness: then let him place the index of the illness's beginning upon that sign and that part of the sign in the circle of signs: then finally, with the index of critical days placed above the intercident, indicative, and critical angles: the signs and parts of signs constituting them will appear in the direct line of confidence: for when the Moon reaches these signs and these parts of signs, the intercident, judged, and critical days shine forth more clearly than the sun. Whether the Moon is fortunate or unfortunate also appears from its position, in the table of planetary dignities appended for this reason. Therefore, throughout the entire course of the illness, this table must be consulted, so that it may be easily recognized on which day the illness is more severe or lighter.

CHAPTER XII. How diseases, their causes, and the affected parts can be recognized has been said in the preceding. Whether they are curable or incurable, acute or chronic, and at what time they should be judged, has also been shown before. Now, however, it is appropriate to show how they are to be cured and at what time remedies should be applied. Therefore, to show the matter briefly, it must be noted that inferior bodies are ruled by superior ones, and especially by the motion of the Moon, diseases vary: not because it excels others in strength and power, but because it is nearer and swifter in motion. For we see humors increase. Bones are filled with marrow at the full moon; all bodies, both in the sea and on land, with increased humor, the Moon causes humors to increase: just as when it decreases, they diminish. Crabs, lobsters, and oysters are full of flesh at the full moon, when the sea swells: humors in the human body, as also in trees, are increased. The opposite appears at the new moon. Moreover, according to the access and recess of the Moon in the signs of the Zodiac, changes of seasons occur. For when the Sun and Moon are in hot signs, heat increases; when finally in cold ones, coldness overcomes heat. Rightly, therefore, in the purgation of humors, the Moon's motion through the signs of the zodiac must be observed. And not only the Moon's motion, but also that of other planets, by whose influence humors are preserved, must be observed.

For Saturn increases, preserves, and retains melancholy: because since he is cold and dry, like melancholy, he therefore increases and retains it. Jupiter, however, who is warm and moderately moist, presides over blood and increases it. But just as Saturn is adverse to blood, Mars rules, governs, and retains yellow bile: because just as bile itself is hot and dry, so Mars is hot and dry, and therefore fosters it. Venus with the Moon, however, expels phlegm by its contrary quality. For since Venus and the Moon are cold and moist, they therefore foster and rule phlegm. The strength of planets having a symbol with humors must therefore be avoided in their evacuation. But the strength of planets adverse to them must be worked upon. For example, when bile is to be evacuated, Mars must be placed in a cadent house (but not in an angle or succedent house). Venus, on the contrary, must be fortified in angles or succedent houses. For she, by her contrary quality, aids nature against bile and strengthens the expulsive faculty for its expulsion. If also, in the evacuation of bile, the Moon together with Venus is strengthened, it would render nature stronger for its expulsion. But if both, that is, Venus and the Moon, cannot be fortified: with Mars debilitated, one of them should be strengthened. When Mars has equally overcome Venus in strength, he will expel phlegm. But when we wish to evacuate melancholy, Jupiter must be fortified so that he can expel it: and lest Saturn retain it, we try to render him weaker. The completely opposite reasoning is observed in evacuating blood. For Jupiter is rendered weaker, and Saturn's strengths are reinforced: lest Jupiter prohibit the evacuation of blood, and Saturn help.

A choice must also be made in the election of hours. For Jupiter's hour is beneficial in the evacuation of melancholy; but Saturn's is harmful. And in the same way, judgment must be made in purging individual humors. However, at the time when a laxative medicine is given, it is safer to choose the hour of benevolent planets than of malevolent ones, and in all cases it is better to avoid the hours of Saturn and Mars, and the Moon's applications to them. Planets also relate to certain parts of the human body, namely those that correspond to their natures. For example, because the Moon is cold and moist, it relates to the brain. Venus, which is likewise moderately moist, preserves the testicles. Mercury is common and convertible, therefore it governs the lungs. The Sun, which has acquired conservative heat, moderates the heart by its influence. Mars, however, because he is excessively hot and dry, relates to and moderates the gallbladder and kidneys. The liver is ruled by the heat and moisture of Jupiter, just as the spleen is ruled by the coldness and dryness of Saturn. Therefore, at the time when those planets dominate, those parts should not be evacuated: for they would retain harmful humor and impede healing. However, at the time when they are strong and fortunate in the sky, it will be most appropriate to strengthen those parts. Let us therefore return to the matter from which we digressed.

The humors of our body follow the Moon's motion. For in the first and third weeks of the Moon, that is, from the conjunction of the Sun and Moon to the first quarter, and from the opposition or full moon to the second quarter, humors move from the center to the circumference: and therefore bloodletting, baths, fomentations, and whatever medicines are designed to draw humors from the center to the circumference, are suitable in these weeks. In the second and fourth weeks of the Moon, that is, from the first quarter of the Moon to its opposition with the Sun or full moon, humors move from the circumference to the center: and therefore medicines designed to draw humors from the circumference to the center are suitable in these weeks.

Not only are the Moon's quadratures to be observed in purging humors, but also the signs in which the Moon is, and its various aspects to the planets. Purgative medicines are given most conveniently when the Moon is in watery signs, such as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. Likewise, purgation is better or worse depending on the Moon's aspects to various other planets. Pills are also more suitable at certain times, electuaries at another time, and finally potions at another. The following table shows which times are suitable.

In Cancer, and when the Moon traverses these signs with a sextile or trine aspect to Venus, it helps to evacuate bile. With a sextile or trine to the Sun or Mars, it is beneficial for evacuating phlegm. With a sextile or trine to Jupiter, it is effective for expelling melancholy. Venus helps to evacuate bile. (With an electuary.)

In Scorpio, and when the Moon has these aspects, the method of evacuating humors is as follows: The Sun or Mars by aspect aids the expulsion of phlegm. Jupiter increases the purgation of melancholy. Venus helps to evacuate bile. (With a potion.)

In Pisces, with a sextile or trine aspect to the Sun or Mars, it is timely to purge phlegm. With a sextile or trine to Jupiter, it is permissible to purge melancholic humor. (With pills.)

However, when a laxative medicine is administered, the Moon should not be conjoined with Jupiter. For although Jupiter is good and fortunate, yet because he is a parent and friend of nature, he strengthens it and aids against the medicine, so that the medicine, overcome by nature, performs its work minimally. According to Ptolemy's nineteenth aphorism of the Centiloquy: If anyone takes a laxative when the Moon is with Jupiter, the medicine's work and effect will be diminished.

Since disease often presses so urgently that it rejects delay, care must be taken, if possible, that the Moon is not in ruminant signs, such as Aries, Taurus, or Capricorn, nor applying to or conjoined with a retrograde planet, because these provoke vomiting. However, that time is most convenient for administering emetic medicine: but the Ascendant and its lord must be strengthened and made fortunate. Malefic aspects should be avoided as much as possible. The lord of the Ascendant, if possible, should be conjoined with a planet below the earth, or applying to it, so that humors may be more easily drawn downwards.

Furthermore, in the administration of laxative medicine, if the Moon is diminished in motion and light, it will be more effective.

Just as the Moon's motion is observed in the purgation of humors, so too it must be observed in the strengthening of the body's faculties or powers in this way: When the Moon is in hot and dry signs (Aries, Leo, Sagittarius), the attractive virtue is strengthened, because the Moon influences according to the nature of the place, and this faculty thrives on similar qualities. When the Moon is in cold and dry signs (Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn), the retentive virtue is aided, for it is helped by the qualities that dominate at that time. When the Moon is in cold and moist signs (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces), the concoctive faculty is confirmed, for it is perfected by such qualities. When the Moon is in hot and moist signs (Gemini, Libra, Aquarius), the expulsive virtue is made stronger, which is especially aided and perfected by these qualities.

Therefore, at that time, and when the Moon is conjoined with Jupiter or Venus, strengthening and astringent medicines should be given.

However, when we intend to correct some intemperance, the Moon should be in a sign endowed with the quality we wish to induce. For example, when we want to warm, the Moon should occupy fiery signs at that time; when to cool, it will hold cold signs; when to moisten, moist signs; and finally, when to dry, it should possess dry signs. What these signs are was made clear in the preceding table and the first chapter of the first book.

Therefore, the parts from the head to the chest are cured of disease when the Moon is in the three aforementioned signs (Aries, Taurus, Gemini), or when those signs are ascending. And the parts from the chest to the genitals are freed from diseases when the Moon is in Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, or when those signs are ascending. Those parts from the genitals to the knees will be treated when the Moon occupies Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius. Finally, the parts from the knees to the feet are to be restored to health when the Moon is in Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.

However, be careful not to touch a part with iron when the Moon occupies the sign ruling that part, and in all operations performed with iron, see that the Moon does not have an application to Mars by square, or by square or opposition (for other aspects are mediocre).

Not only signs, but also houses must be observed. For just as it has been said about signs, so houses influence parts of the human body. Therefore, when the treatment of a disease of any part is begun, the house ruling that part and its lord should be well-affected and fortunate. For example, when a head ailment is to be treated: the first house and its lord (whom the Arabs call Almuten) should be strengthened and made fortunate by the aspect or presence of benefics, if we wish the future cure to be prosperous. Likewise for the second house and its lord, if you wish to restore the neck; the third, if the shoulders, hands, and arms; the fourth, if the lungs, chest, and breasts to their former state of health. Thus it must be done for each house and its lord, when we wish to restore to health the parts subject to these houses. Therefore, at the beginning of all treatments, the Ascendant, its lord, the house ruling the part, and its lord must be made fortunate.

Jupiter, if possible, should be placed in the Ascendant, or the eleventh house, or the tenth, or the ninth, and his beneficence should be increased.

Similarly, the planet ruling the disease we wish to cure and ruling the part, must be made fortunate. For example, if phrenitis is to be cured, Mercury will aspect the Moon with a trine or sextile aspect; and he will be placed optimally and in a good place, and in his dignities: for example, if he is in the first seven degrees of Virgo, in his own house, exaltation, and terms. If, however, you wish to correct a cold and moist intemperance of the stomach, Venus must be made fortunate and strengthened, so that if she is placed in the first eight degrees of Taurus, or the first twelve of Pisces, she will be in her own house or exaltation and terms; or if placed in Libra, she will also be in her own house.

It is clear, therefore, that in the purgation of humors and the cure of diseases, a contrary rule is observed for planets and signs. For in the purgation of any humor, the strength of the planet symbolizing the humor to be purged is avoided; but the sign symbolizing it is chosen. In the evacuation of bile, a hot and dry sign ruling the part is chosen, and the time when the Moon is in it is awaited, or it is forced to ascend. Cold and moist signs are suitable for the evacuation of phlegm. Cold and dry signs for purging melancholic humor; and finally, hot and moist signs are chosen for extracting blood. What these are was sufficiently clear in the preceding.

Therefore, as far as the movements of the stars are concerned, the movements of the Moon and its aspects to other planets must be especially observed. For when the Moon is in any planetary aspect, bloodletting is not good. First, as far as the Moon's motion is concerned, it must be known that the time from the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, that is, from the new moon up to the Moon's first quarter, is suitable for young people for bloodletting. From the first quarter up to the opposition of the Sun and Moon, or full moon, bloodletting is suitable for young men and those in their prime. After the opposition or full moon to the second quarter of the Moon, blood should be drawn from those in the prime of life and the elderly. Finally, from the second quarter of the Moon up to the new moon, venesection is suitable for the elderly.

However, bloodletting is least suitable for all complexions when the Moon is in all signs. But for phlegmatic individuals, it is suitable when the Moon is in Aries and Sagittarius; however, the cephalic vein in Aries is excepted, and in Sagittarius, the veins of the hips. For melancholic individuals, when the Moon occupies Aquarius and the first half of Libra, bloodletting is not prohibited. However, Aquarius excepts the shins, and Libra the buttocks. Finally, when the Moon traverses Cancer or Pisces, blood evacuation will benefit bilious individuals. However, Cancer prohibits cutting the vein of the lungs, and Pisces prohibits cutting the veins of the feet. According to Ptolemy's twentieth aphorism: It is dangerous to touch a part with iron when the Moon is in the sign ruling that part.

Other signs, namely Leo, Gemini, the last half of Libra, and Scorpio, are not suitable for bloodletting. Leo, namely, because of its heat, and because it is the Sun's house. Gemini, because it rules the arms, in which the vein is most often cut. The last half of Libra: because it is the Via Combusta, and there the Moon (which should be free from misfortunes) is also afflicted. Finally, Scorpio, because it is called the Via Combusta with the last half of Libra; and because it is Mars's house, it forbids venesection. The earthy triplicity is not suitable and is rarely chosen, except at the beginning of the treatment of an ancient disease, as has already been said in the preceding.

Furthermore, various aspects of the Moon to other planets hinder or help this to be done. Those that forbid it are listed here in order. Moon with Sun: hinders bloodletting for a space of three days before and after. Prohibits blood evacuation for half a day on either side. Forbids opening a vein one day before and after. Moon with Saturn or Mars: hinders bloodletting one day before and after. Moon with a malefic: prohibits opening a vein for a space of one day on either side. Likewise, opening a vein should not be done when the Moon is Void of Course; nor should purgative medicine be given at this time. Care must be taken during the hour of the malefics, namely Saturn or Mars, in blood evacuation. Finally, when a vein is opened, the Moon, if possible, should not occupy common signs, for they hinder the action and cause a flow of blood due to error.

Now it must be said which aspects of the Moon to the planets make bloodletting commendable. These are the following: Commendable aspects in bloodletting. Moon with Venus: is optimal for bloodletting, provided, however, that Venus is not combust. Moon with Jupiter or Sun: is good for blood evacuation, and indeed optimal. Moon square Jupiter or Venus: is suitable for bloodletting; it is good. Opposition with the same: are mediocre in phlebotomy. Therefore, these aspects must be diligently observed if we hope for a prosperous and healthy bloodletting. Finally, care must be taken in bloodletting that the Moon does not apply to the lord of the eighth house, or house of death.

Furthermore, aspects of the Moon to malefic planets hinder bathing: such as the Moon's conjunction, square, or opposition to Saturn or Mars. Moreover, aspects or applications of the Moon with the lord of the eighth house and combust planets hinder bathing. However, aspects and applications of the Moon to benefic planets, such as its conjunction or sextile or trine aspect, or applications of the same aspects to Jupiter or Venus, or a trine or sextile to the Sun; or even a square and opposition of the Moon to Jupiter and Venus, make the bath more effective and the time most suitable for bathing.

Now, concerning cupping glasses, let us say that they should not be applied to any limb when the Moon is in the sign to which that part or limb is subject. According to Ptolemy's already mentioned twentieth aphorism: for they are mostly applied with sacrifice. Likewise, bad aspects of the Moon prohibit the application of cupping glasses, such as the Moon's conjunction, square, or opposition with Mars or Saturn, or applications of the same aspects. Also, as the Moon traverses different signs, it is suitable for certain complexions. For phlegmatic individuals, for example, they are most conveniently given when the Moon is in Aries and Sagittarius, except for the head in Aries, and the hips in Sagittarius. For bilious individuals, however, they are conveniently applied when the Moon traverses Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. But Cancer excepts the chest, Scorpio the genitals and thighs, and Pisces finally prohibits the feet. For melancholic individuals, finally, they are affixed when the Moon is in Aquarius or Libra; however, the buttocks in Libra and the shins in Aquarius are prohibited. All these are considered optimal when the Moon has aspects or applications to benefic planets. For example, the Moon's conjunction, sextile, or trine aspect, or applications of the same aspects to Jupiter or Venus, or even their square and opposition, provide for a suitable application of cupping glasses.

In the injection of enemas, the Moon should occupy Scorpio or Libra, and apply to a planet existing below the earth. Furthermore, the Moon should have a sextile or trine, or even a square or opposition to Jupiter or Venus, or be conjoined with them. But care must be taken that the lord of the Ascendant is not conjoined with the lord of the sixth, nor applies to it by any aspect. The Moon and the lord of the Ascendant must be especially kept away from malefic aspects.

Topical remedies should be applied to the part when the Moon is in the sign ruling that part. For example, if topical remedies are applied to the head, the Moon should occupy Aries. If to the arms, it should possess Gemini; and so on for others. However, at that time, neither fire nor iron should be applied, according to what has been said. If, however, remedies that generate flesh are used, the Moon should be increased in light and number, or in its increment. When, finally, remedies that reduce flesh are used, the opposite rule is observed: for they should be applied at the time when the Moon is diminished in light and number. Finally, cooling, warming, and other quality-inducing medicines should be applied when the Moon traverses signs suitable for these qualities.

Immoderate exercise, leisure & labor. How the causes can be known, we have taught before. The cure varies according to the diversity of causes. Indeed, causes are ruled by certain planets with qualities corresponding to them, as blood by Jupiter: bile, however, with heat, is governed by Mars: so also other causes are ruled by other planets. This, however, must not be omitted, that spirits & vapors are ruled & governed by Mercury. Therefore, when someone is about to undertake the cure of these diseases, let him choose a suitable celestial influence. Let the Moon, therefore, increased in light & number, & free from misfortunes, be placed in Aries. Care must be taken, however, that it does not ascend: for in the ascendant, as has been said, it is afflicted by misfortune. But let the lord of the ascendant, because the ascendant regards the head, be well-fortified, and free from evils: nor let there be malefics in the ascendant. Care must also be taken that the Moon, especially in its increase, is not joined to Mars by square or opposition or even by conjunction, and in its decrease, by the aforesaid aspects with Saturn: for Mars increases heat: Saturn, however, coldness. Mars, moreover, is harmful to the eyes in all things. If, however, the Moon in its decrease has a trine or sextile to Mars, or the same in its increase to Saturn: the cure will not be delayed on that account. Also, the hour of Mars must be avoided at the beginning of the cure, and care must be taken that it does not hold the ascendant. Finally, the cure (if possible) should begin with the Moon increasing in light and number. These things thus considered, if the disease has its cause in a peccant humor either in the whole body, or in a part or the head. With the Moon existing in Aries, or in Pisces, with Aries ascending, and the planet regarding the peccant humor being weak, it will be purged: provided, however, that the planet which is adverse to this humor is strong. After the body is purged, topical remedies should be applied in the suitable constellation mentioned above. Let the Moon, however, hold Aries, or a mutable sign, or a common sign, when fire or iron is to be applied to the eye. But if Aries ascends, a more excellent operation will be performed. When the disease is cured, with the Moon existing in the same sign and free from malefics, the head & eye should be strengthened. As for the eradication of ear diseases, it must be said that in the election of celestial influence, it differs nothing from the cure of eye diseases, because the whole head and its parts are subject to the lord of Aries. In this, however, they differ, that because the ears are drier, harder & more robust parts than the eyes, they require stronger medicaments. Therefore, since enough has been said about the cure of diseases of those parts: let us turn our pen to the cure of fevers. Teaching what fever is, and how many differences of fevers there are: and that from Galen and good authors. Fever, therefore, is heat beyond nature, which, taking its beginning from the heart, diffuses through the arteries into the whole body, and injures its actions: which others also define thus. Fever is heat beyond nature diffused from the heart into the whole body. The difference of fevers, although it can be taken either from essence or from accidents (as is clear from Galen's books on the differences of fevers). That, however, which is sought from the matter in which the heat is kindled, is common & ordinary. Therefore, since there are three things in the body (as pleased Hippocrates in the sixth book of Epidemics), namely, the containing, the contained, & the impelling, that is, solid parts, humors & spirits. For either heat beyond nature is kindled in the spirits: & then it is ephemera, which is interpreted as diaria: & it is twofold, one, namely, simple, whose access is terminated in one day, that is, in the space of twenty-four hours, & this is properly called ephemera. The other, however, whose access extends to the third day or beyond to the fourth, namely, or the fifth or sixth or even to the seventh. Or immoderate heat beyond nature is kindled in putrefying humors, & it is the second kind of fevers. Furthermore, humors putrefy in two ways. For either it putrefies within the vessels or outside: within the vessels again in two ways: namely, either all equally putrefy in the largest vessels, & then it is sinochus or putrid continens: or only one humor, & it is syneches to the Greeks, but called continua by the Latins. And it is threefold, because either yellow bile putrefies, & it is continuous tertian, so called because, no less than intermittent tertian, it has an access every third day: or phlegm acquires heat beyond nature, & putrefies, & it is continuous quotidian: or melancholy, & it is continuous quartan: because although it is continuous: nevertheless, just as tertian and quotidian have exacerbations every third day and every single day, so also quartan has an access every fourth day. Now, however, let us return to another kind of putrid fevers. Humors putrefy outside the vessels & intermittent fevers occur, as if yellow bile putrefies, it is intermittent tertian, exquisite & simple if the bile is sincere & pure: but notha or spurious, if it is mixed with phlegm. Quotidian, however, occurs when sweet phlegm putrefies, & it is called amphemeros, because it has an access every single day. If, however, glassy phlegm putrefies, it is hepiala. If finally melancholy acquires putrilage outside the vessels, it is intermittent quartan. The third kind of simple fevers is when heat beyond nature is kindled in the solid parts of the body: & then it is hectic: which if it has so increased that it wastes the solid parts & humors, it is called marasmus, & let these things briefly said about the differences of fevers suffice. However, each species of these fevers is ruled by a certain planet, whose strength in the cure of that fever must be avoided, lest it retard the cure. Which planets these are, the following table, embracing all the differences of fevers, teaches. In the cure, therefore, of these fevers, it must be diligently observed that the planet ruling and moderating the disease is not strong in the sky: but rather weak, and the planet opposing and adverse to the disease is strong and fortunate. As in the beginning of the cure of quartan fever. The applications of the Moon to Saturn, and the strength of Saturn are to be feared. Likewise, Saturn should neither be the lord of the ascendant, nor placed in it or in the midheaven. However, Jupiter, who (as said before) is adverse to it, must be strengthened and made fortunate in the ascendant or midheaven, that is, in the tenth house. And if he could rule the ascendant, a more excellent operation would be performed. But if this cannot be done, let him regard the ascendant and its lord. Let the Moon also aspect him with a trine or sextile aspect, or apply to him with these aspects. Finally, let the Moon be free from evils and misfortunes, and increased in light and number in its increment. Therefore, one must proceed in this way in the cure of the remaining fevers. As in the cure of tertian fever, Venus & Moon must be strengthened and made fortunate. The weaker Mars is, the more prosperous the cure will be. In the cure of quotidian fever, however, one must proceed in the contrary order. The Moon, however, must always be fortunate. If anyone diligently observes these things, the cure will succeed only prosperously and happily (with the favor of God, the best and greatest). Fragment of diseases & critical days to be known from the motion of the stars by Claudius Dariotus Pomarsensis, END. TO THE JUDGMENTS OF THE STARS. (This last part is a colophon and not part of the astrological rules.)

Therefore, when someone is about to undertake the cure of these diseases, let him choose a suitable celestial influence. Let the Moon, therefore, increased in light & number, & free from misfortunes, be placed in Aries. Care must be taken, however, that it does not ascend: for in the ascendant, as has been said, it is afflicted by misfortune. But let the lord of the ascendant, because the ascendant regards the head, be well-fortified, and free from evils: nor let there be malefics in the ascendant. Care must also be taken that the Moon, especially in its increase, is not joined to Mars by square or opposition or even by conjunction, and in its decrease, by the aforesaid aspects with Saturn: for Mars increases heat: Saturn, however, coldness. Mars, moreover, is harmful to the eyes in all things. If, however, the Moon in its decrease has a trine or sextile to Mars, or the same in its increase to Saturn: the cure will not be delayed on that account. Also, the hour of Mars must be avoided at the beginning of the cure, and care must be taken that it does not hold the ascendant. Finally, the cure (if possible) should begin with the Moon increasing in light and number. These things thus considered, if the disease has its cause in a peccant humor either in the whole body, or in a part or the head. With the Moon existing in Aries, or in Pisces, with Aries ascending, and the planet regarding the peccant humor being weak, it will be purged: provided, however, that the planet which is adverse to this humor is strong. After the body is purged, topical remedies should be applied in the suitable constellation mentioned above. Let the Moon, however, hold Aries, or a mutable sign, or a common sign, when fire or iron is to be applied to the eye. But if Aries ascends, a more excellent operation will be performed. When the disease is cured, with the Moon existing in the same sign and free from malefics, the head & eye should be strengthened. As for the eradication of ear diseases, it must be said that in the election of celestial influence, it differs nothing from the cure of eye diseases, because the whole head and its parts are subject to the lord of Aries. In this, however, they differ, that because the ears are drier, harder & more robust parts than the eyes, they require stronger medicaments. Therefore, since enough has been said about the cure of diseases of those parts: let us turn our pen to the cure of fevers. Teaching what fever is, and how many differences of fevers there are: and that from Galen and good authors. Fever, therefore, is heat beyond nature, which, taking its beginning from the heart, diffuses through the arteries into the whole body, and injures its actions: which others also define thus. Fever is heat beyond nature diffused from the heart into the whole body. The difference of fevers, although it can be taken either from essence or from accidents (as is clear from Galen's books on the differences of fevers). That, however, which is sought from the matter in which the heat is kindled, is common & ordinary. Therefore, since there are three things in the body (as pleased Hippocrates in the sixth book of Epidemics), namely, the containing, the contained, & the impelling, that is, solid parts, humors & spirits. For either heat beyond nature is kindled in the spirits: & then it is ephemera, which is interpreted as diaria: & it is twofold, one, namely, simple, whose access is terminated in one day, that is, in the space of twenty-four hours, & this is properly called ephemera. The other, however, whose access extends to the third day or beyond to the fourth, namely, or the fifth or sixth or even to the seventh. Or immoderate heat beyond nature is kindled in putrefying humors, & it is the second kind of fevers. Furthermore, humors putrefy in two ways. For either it putrefies within the vessels or outside: within the vessels again in two ways: namely, either all equally putrefy in the largest vessels, & then it is sinochus or putrid continens: or only one humor, & it is syneches to the Greeks, but called continua by the Latins. And it is threefold, because either yellow bile putrefies, & it is continuous tertian, so called because, no less than intermittent tertian, it has an access every third day: or phlegm acquires heat beyond nature, & putrefies, & it is continuous quotidian: or melancholy, & it is continuous quartan: because although it is continuous: nevertheless, just as tertian and quotidian have exacerbations every third day and every single day, so also quartan has an access every fourth day. Now, however, let us return to another kind of putrid fevers. Humors putrefy outside the vessels & intermittent fevers occur, as if yellow bile putrefies, it is intermittent tertian, exquisite & simple if the bile is sincere & pure: but notha or spurious, if it is mixed with phlegm. Quotidian, however, occurs when sweet phlegm putrefies, & it is called amphemeros, because it has an access every single day. If, however, glassy phlegm putrefies, it is hepiala. If finally melancholy acquires putrilage outside the vessels, it is intermittent quartan. The third kind of simple fevers is when heat beyond nature is kindled in the solid parts of the body: & then it is hectic: which if it has so increased that it wastes the solid parts & humors, it is called marasmus, & let these things briefly said about the differences of fevers suffice. However, each species of these fevers is ruled by a certain planet, whose strength in the cure of that fever must be avoided, lest it retard the cure. Which planets these are, the following table, embracing all the differences of fevers, teaches. In the cure, therefore, of these fevers, it must be diligently observed that the planet ruling and moderating the disease is not strong in the sky: but rather weak, and the planet opposing and adverse to the disease is strong and fortunate. As in the beginning of the cure of quartan fever. The applications of the Moon to Saturn, and the strength of Saturn are to be feared. Likewise, Saturn should neither be the lord of the ascendant, nor placed in it or in the midheaven. However, Jupiter, who (as said before) is adverse to it, must be strengthened and made fortunate in the ascendant or midheaven, that is, in the tenth house. And if he could rule the ascendant, a more excellent operation would be performed. But if this cannot be done, let him regard the ascendant and its lord. Let the Moon also aspect him with a trine or sextile aspect, or apply to him with these aspects. Finally, let the Moon be free from evils and misfortunes, and increased in light and number in its increment. Therefore, one must proceed in this way in the cure of the remaining fevers. As in the cure of tertian fever, Venus & Moon must be strengthened and made fortunate. The weaker Mars is, the more prosperous the cure will be. In the cure of quotidian fever, however, one must proceed in the contrary order. The Moon, however, must always be fortunate. If anyone diligently observes these things, the cure will succeed only prosperously and happily (with the favor of God, the best and greatest). Fragment of diseases & critical days to be known from the motion of the stars by Claudius Dariotus Pomarsensis, END. TO THE JUDGMENTS OF THE STARS. (This last part is a colophon and not part of the astrological rules.)

Care must also be taken that the Moon, especially in its increase, is not joined to Mars by square or opposition or even by conjunction, and in its decrease, by the aforesaid aspects with Saturn: for Mars increases heat: Saturn, however, coldness. Mars, moreover, is harmful to the eyes in all things. If, however, the Moon in its decrease has a trine or sextile to Mars, or the same in its increase to Saturn: the cure will not be delayed on that account.

Also, the hour of Mars must be avoided at the beginning of the cure, and care must be taken that it does not hold the ascendant. Finally, the cure (if possible) should begin with the Moon increasing in light and number.

These things thus considered, if the disease has its cause in a peccant humor either in the whole body, or in a part or the head. With the Moon existing in Aries, or in Pisces, with Aries ascending, and the planet regarding the peccant humor being weak, it will be purged: provided, however, that the planet which is adverse to this humor is strong. After the body is purged, topical remedies should be applied in the suitable constellation mentioned above. Let the Moon, however, hold Aries, or a mutable sign, or a common sign, when fire or iron is to be applied to the eye. But if Aries ascends, a more excellent operation will be performed. When the disease is cured, with the Moon existing in the same sign and free from malefics, the head & eye should be strengthened.

As for the eradication of ear diseases, it must be said that in the election of celestial influence, it differs nothing from the cure of eye diseases, because the whole head and its parts are subject to the lord of Aries. In this, however, they differ, that because the ears are drier, harder & more robust parts than the eyes, they require stronger medicaments. Therefore, since enough has been said about the cure of diseases of those parts: let us turn our pen to the cure of fevers. Teaching what fever is, and how many differences of fevers there are: and that from Galen and good authors.

Fever, therefore, is heat beyond nature, which, taking its beginning from the heart, diffuses through the arteries into the whole body, and injures its actions: which others also define thus. Fever is heat beyond nature diffused from the heart into the whole body. The difference of fevers, although it can be taken either from essence or from accidents (as is clear from Galen's books on the differences of fevers). That, however, which is sought from the matter in which the heat is kindled, is common & ordinary. Therefore, since there are three things in the body (as pleased Hippocrates in the sixth book of Epidemics), namely, the containing, the contained, & the impelling

impelling: that is, solid parts, humors & spirits. For either heat beyond nature is kindled in the spirits: & then it is ephemera, which is interpreted as diaria: & it is twofold, one, namely, simple, whose access is terminated in one day, that is, in the space of twenty-four hours, & this is properly called ephemera. The other, however, whose access extends to the third day or beyond to the fourth, namely, or the fifth or sixth or even to the seventh.

Or immoderate heat beyond nature is kindled in putrefying humors, & it is the second kind of fevers. Furthermore, humors putrefy in two ways. For either it putrefies within the vessels or outside: within the vessels again in two ways: namely, either all equally putrefy in the largest vessels, & then it is sinochus or putrid continens: or only one humor, & it is syneches to the Greeks, but called continua by the Latins. And it is threefold, because either yellow bile putrefies, & it is continuous tertian, so called because, no less than intermittent tertian, it has an access every third day: or phlegm acquires heat beyond nature, & putrefies, & it is continuous quotidian: or melancholy, & it is continuous quartan: because although it is continuous: nevertheless, just as tertian and quotidian have exacerbations every third day and every single day, so also quartan has an access every fourth day.

Now, however, let us return to another kind of putrid fevers. Humors putrefy outside the vessels & intermittent fevers occur, as if yellow bile putrefies, it is intermittent tertian, exquisite & simple if the bile is sincere & pure: but notha or spurious, if it is mixed with phlegm. Quotidian, however, occurs when sweet phlegm putrefies, & it is called amphemeros

said to have an access every single day. If, however, glassy phlegm putrefies, it is hepiala. If finally melancholy acquires putrilage outside the vessels, it is intermittent quartan. The third kind of simple fevers is when heat beyond nature is kindled in the solid parts of the body: & then it is hectic: which if it has so increased that it wastes the solid parts & humors, it is called marasmus, & let these things briefly said about the differences of fevers suffice.

However, each species of these fevers is ruled by a certain planet, whose strength in the cure of that fever must be avoided, lest it retard the cure. Which planets these are, the following table, embracing all the differences of fevers, teaches.

Simple ephemera without addition. Diaria of many days, which by another name is called non-putrid sinochus. And these are directed by Jupiter.

In spirits, and it is ephemera, that is, diaria. And it is twofold: All equally, and it is sinochus or putrid continens, which is ruled by the empire of Saturn, Mars & Venus.

Yellow bile, let it be continuous tertian, ardent, noted by Mars.

Continuous quotidian phlegm, which is ruled by Venus & Moon.

Continuous quartan melancholy by Saturn.

Let pure yellow bile be exquisite tertian, by Mars.

Let mixed phlegm be spurious. Which are ruled by Mars & Venus.

Sweet, & let it be intermittent quotidian. Both obey the empire of Venus & Moon.

Glassy phlegm, & let it be hepiala: Melancholy, & let it be intermittent quartan, which is subject to Saturn.

Melancholy, & let it be intermittent quartan, which is subject to Saturn.

Hectic in solid parts & let it be, or Marasmus. By Mercury.

In the cure, therefore, of these fevers, it must be diligently observed that the planet ruling and moderating the disease is not strong in the sky: but rather weak, and the planet opposing and adverse to the disease is strong and fortunate.

As in the beginning of the cure of quartan fever. The applications of the Moon to Saturn, and the strength of Saturn are to be feared. Likewise, Saturn should neither be the lord of the ascendant, nor placed in it or in the midheaven. However, Jupiter, who (as said before) is adverse to it, must be strengthened and made fortunate in the ascendant or midheaven, that is, in the tenth house. And if he could rule the ascendant, a more excellent operation would be performed. But if this cannot be done, let him regard the ascendant and its lord. Let the Moon also aspect him with a trine or sextile aspect, or apply to him with these aspects.

Finally, let the Moon be free from evils and misfortunes, and increased in light and number in its increment. Therefore, one must proceed in this way in the cure of the remaining fevers.

As in the cure of tertian fever, Venus & Moon must be strengthened and made fortunate. The weaker Mars is, the more prosperous the cure will be. In the cure of quotidian fever, however, one must proceed in the contrary order. The Moon, however, must always be fortunate. If anyone diligently observes these things, the cure will succeed only prosperously and happily (with the favor of God, the best and greatest).