[Preface to the Introductions to Astrology]
This volume presents a critical edition of the Hebrew texts, with English translation and commentary, of Reshit Hokhmah (Beginning of Wisdom) and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot (Judgments of the Zodiacal Signs), by Abraham Ibn Ezra (c. 1089-c. 1161). Reshit Hokhmah, the most extensive and influential of his astrological works, was widely circulated among Jews in the Middle Ages. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, in contrast, is more obscure and its authorship by Ibn Ezra requires substantiation. I have grouped them in this volume because they are both introductions to astrology, explaining fundamental concepts and the underlying worldview. These treatises are rich in astrological information and complex in content, demonstrating the close collaboration between astronomy and astrology in medieval science. This volume sheds new light on Ibn Ezra's sources, revealing that a significant portion of Reshit Hokhmah consists of translations or paraphrases of Arabic astrological texts, indicating Ibn Ezra's role as a translator. This publication completes Ibn Ezra's extant Hebrew astrological writings, though some treatises exist only in Latin translation or may have been originally written in Latin. Readers may wonder why these introductory works were placed in the final volume. Reshit Hokhmah had a prior critical edition, making its immediate re-editing less urgent. Furthermore, these works connect to all branches of astrology, so it was deemed best to publish them after other specialized treatises were available. Lastly, their complexity made them a formidable challenge, requiring familiarity with all astrological minutiae, hence their placement as the final Hebrew component. I extend my gratitude to Keiji Yamamoto and Charles Burnett for their edition of Abū Maʿshar’s Great Introduction to Astrology, Lenn Schramm for his revisions and suggestions, the Israel Science Foundation for its grant, and the Paris Institute for Advanced Studies for its financial support. Sh. S. June 2016

[Abraham Ibn Ezra's Life and Works]
Abraham Ibn Ezra (circa 1089-circa 1161) spent the first five decades of his life in Muslim Spain, where he received his Jewish and scientific education within the orbit of Arabic culture and language. In this early stage, he apparently made his living as a poet, traveling from one patron to another, and wrote almost nothing related to biblical exegesis and science, the two fields in which he was to excel in the second part of his career! He left his homeland at the age of 50 and began an itinerant life that took him through Italy, France, and England. During these years, he wrote prolifically on a wide variety of subjects. Abraham Ibn Ezra's fame stems from his excellent biblical commentaries, but he also wrote religious and secular poetry and a series of religious-theological monographs and grammatical treatises. His intellectual interests also extended to the sciences. His scientific corpus, comprising more than thirty treatises, deals with mathematics, astronomy, scientific instruments and tools, and the Jewish calendar; but especially with astrology. An essential feature of this huge and multifarious corpus is that it was written almost exclusively in Hebrew. It is no overstatement to say that were it not for Ibn Ezra's forced emigration from Muslim Spain to Latin Europe, which was accompanied by a transition from Arabic to Hebrew and by the broadening of his literary activities to the fields of biblical exegesis and science, he would have fallen into oblivion as a scholar.

[Ibn Ezra's Astrological Influence]
From the Middle Ages until the present, the development of astrology among Jews has been associated with the name of Abraham Ibn Ezra. For medieval Latin culture, Abraham Avenezra was mainly an intermediary and transmitter of Arabic science and astrology to twelfth-century Europe. Although Ibn Ezra's astrological treatises were written in Hebrew and certainly targeted Hebrew readers, shortly after his death they began to be transmitted to non-Jewish readers, as collections of Ibn Ezra's astrological treatises were translated in repeated waves into Latin and the emerging European vernaculars. From a Jewish perspective, Abraham Ibn Ezra's contribution was different and important in two ways. First, by incorporating astrological ideas into his influential biblical exegesis, he promoted the smooth absorption of astrological content into the hard core of Jewish culture. In addition, he created the first comprehensive corpus of Hebrew astrological textbooks that address the main systems of Arabic astrology and provided Hebrew readers with wide access to astrology. Judging by the numbers of extant manuscript copies, Ibn Ezra's Hebrew astrological treatises circulated widely among Jews. His astrological achievement was never repeated, neither in the Middle Ages nor in the Modern Era. Thanks to recent discoveries, today we know of nineteen treatises by him, addressing the main genres of Greek and Arabic astrological literature, as follows:

[Introductions to Astrology]
Introductions to astrology, conveying basic elements of the worldview underlying astrology and explaining technical concepts of the various branches of astrology: (1-3) The extant complete version of Sefer Reshit Hokhmah (Book of the Beginning of Wisdom) and Sefer Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot (Book of the Judgments of the Zodiacal Signs); these two works are edited in the present volume. The recently discovered second version of Reshit Hokhmah (henceforth Reshit Hokhmah II) was recently published in a separate study.

[Treatises on Astrological Reasons]
Treatises explaining the astrological reasons behind the concepts employed in both versions of Reshit Hokhmah: (4-5) The two versions of Sefer ha-Te'amim (Book of Reasons; henceforth Teamim I and Teamim II). The critical editions of the Hebrew texts of these two commentaries, accompanied by an English translation and commentary, were published in the first volume of this series.

[Nativities and Destiny]
Nativities, which posit that the destiny of the newborn is determined by the configuration of the celestial bodies at the instant of birth and may be learned from the natal horoscopic chart: (6-8) The complete extant version of Sefer ha-Moladot (Book of Nativities; henceforth Moladot). The critical edition of the Hebrew text of Moladot, accompanied by an English translation and commentary, was published in volume four of this series. The second version of Sefer ha-Moladot survives today in a Latin translation entitled Liber nativitatum (henceforth Nativitatum). A Latin treatise entitled Liber de nativitatibus (henceforth Nativitatibus) is probably a translation of a lost Hebrew text by Ibn Ezra, although it cannot be ruled out that it was composed with Ibn Ezra's active participation. A critical edition of these two Latin texts, accompanied by English translations and commentaries, is planned for the next volume of this series.

[Zodiacal Signs and Planetary Dignities]
The zodiacal signs and the planetary dignities, which depend on the position of the planets in the signs. While Reshit Hokhmah dedicates almost all of chapter 2 to this subject – nearly half of the entire treatise – Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot devotes several continuous sections to it after the introduction. See below for details on the contents of this part of Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Aspects, Quadrants, and Horoscopic Places]
The aspects, the quadrants of the horoscopic chart, and the twelve horoscopic places and their indications. These topics occupy all of chapter 3 in Reshit Hokhmah; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot addresses them in a number of discontinuous sections and takes a different approach to them.

[Natures and Significances of Seven Planets]
The natures and significances of the seven planets. Both Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot organize this topic into seven continuous sections (all of chapter 4 in Reshit Hokhmah). Although the two works treat the planets in a different order, their accounts of them are similar (though not identical).

[Planets' Fortune, Misfortune, Power, and Weakness]
The planets' fortune and misfortune, and their power and weakness, as a function of their motion in their orbs, or of their changing position.

[Decan Lords of the Signs]
The first relates to the section of Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot that lists the lords of the three decans in each sign. What catches the reader's eye is that this section, according to all the manuscripts I checked, is organized into three illogical and discontinuous parts: the first begins with the lords of the three decans of Cancer (not of Aries, as expected) and ends with the lords of the decans of Pisces; the third part (not the second) begins with the lords of the three decans of Aries and ends with the lords of the decans of Gemini; while in the middle of the section, between the two separate lists, we encounter the rubric "Lords of the decans" (which we would expect to find at the very beginning of the section), followed by a short explanation of how the lord of the decan is determined for some specific horoscopic chart.

[Indications of Horoscopic Places]
The second example relates to indications of the twelve horoscopic places, which Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, in all manuscripts I checked, organizes into three discontinuous and illogical parts, as in the previous example. The first part has the indications of the first through the sixth horoscopic places. At this point, the account is unexpectedly interrupted and the text turns to Enoch’s approach to the “rectification of the nativity,” the so-called trutina Hermetis (Hermes’ balance), according to which the position of the Moon at the moment of birth is the ascendant at the moment of conception, and vice versa. This account, too, is divided into three discontinuous parts: the first describes the trutina Hermetis and reports Ibn Ezra’s own experiences in this regard; the second part interrupts the account of the trutina Hermetis and discusses the distribution of the months of gestation among the planets, in the Ptolemaic order of their orbs; and the third part resumes the treatment of the trutina Hermetis with a treatment of its applicative aspects. At this point, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot resumes the interrupted account of the horoscopic places and presents the indications of the seventh through twelfth horoscopic places.

[Human Soul and Divine Deliverance]
And because the human soul is higher than the intermediary [world], if the soul is wise and understands the work of God, which is both without intermediary and through an intermediary, and if it abandons the desires of the lower world, and secludes itself to cleave to the Glorious Name—then, if in the configuration of the stars at the time of conception there is evil that would come upon him at a certain time, God, to whom he cleaves, will cause reasons to save him from his evil.

[Soul's Ascent to Upper Beings]
'Took me'—the word 'taking' without 'a thing' means the soul of the righteous person with the uppermost beings, who are not corporeal and will never die.

[Path to Heavenly Angels]
'Thou wilt make known to me'—for when the body dies, 'Thou wilt make known to me' the path of 'life'; and the meaning is: the path by which I will ascend to the heavens to be with the uppermost angels.

[Zodiacal Signs and Planetary Dignities]
The basic chemical element, gender, part of the day, and cardinal point associated with the relevant sign. The counterpart of these features in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot is grouped into categories of signs, such as the fiery, earthy, airy, and watery signs for the elements; the masculine and feminine signs for the gender and the part of the day; and the eastern, southern, western, and northern signs for the cardinal point. Meteorological conditions that pertain when the Sun travels through the corresponding sign and the astronomical phenomena, such as the rising times, associated with that sign. In Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, the weather is addressed in the group of the tropical, fixed, and bicorporal signs, and the rising times with the straight and crooked signs. Miscellaneous features associated with the sign, such as the shapes of animals, colors, type of voice, side of the horizon and wind, element, temperature, and bodily humor, tastes, metals, terrestrial climate and countries, and places, letters of the alphabet, and time periods (years, months, days, hours). Of these features, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot mentions signs with the shape of living creatures only for those with a human image, whether they are cut off in their limbs, deformed, libidinous, handsome, of half-beauty, and bald; and for the signs associated with some type of voice, the strong-voiced, half-voiced, and mute. The paranatellonta, namely, constellations or segments of constellations that co-ascend with the three decans of the relevant sign, according to the Persians, the Indians, and Ptolemy. We will have more to say about the paranatellonta in the next section. Nothing in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot corresponds to this topic. The physical appearance and psychological traits of natives born at the same time as the relevant sign rises, and at the same time that the first, second, and third decans of the relevant sign rise. Again, there is no parallel to this topic in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot. Parts of the body and diseases associated with the relevant sign according to the theory of melothesia. By contrast, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot offers a comprehensive account of this topic in a separate section, which attributes the theory to Ptolemy and associates each of the twelve signs with a corresponding part of the body. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot also refers briefly to the applicative aspect of melothesia, though it says nothing about the rationale behind the theory. Parts of the body associated with the seven planets in the relevant sign, according to the theory of the pains of the planets in the signs. By contrast, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot has a comprehensive explanation of the distribution of the pains of the planets among the zodiacal signs in a separate section and instantiates the parts of the body associated with the seven planets only for Aries. The social class and profession of human beings born when the relevant sign is in the ascendant. Here Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot mentions only a quadripartite division of the twelve signs into the four triplicities and assigns a social class to each triplicity. For each sign, the planet that is considered to be lord of the planetary house, lord of the house of exaltation, lord of the house of dejection, and lord of the house of detriment. This subsection also enumerates the degrees of the planetary apogees, perigees, and nodes (Head and Tail of the Dragon) in the relevant sign. By contrast, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot lists, in two separate sections, all the lords of the planetary houses in their respective signs, and all the lords of the houses of exaltation and dejection in their respective signs, according to two approaches: one ascribes the exaltation and dejection to a whole sign, the other to a specific degree in the sign. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot does not refer to planetary apogees, perigees, and nodes in the signs, but explains elsewhere how the relevant dignities are implemented in the interpretation of the horoscopic chart. The list of planets that serve as lords by day and by night of the triplicity that includes the relevant sign, and their partner by day and by night. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot has a single section that lists the lords of the triplicity by day and by night, and their partner, for each of the four triplicities. The list of planets that serve as lords of the three decans in the relevant sign, according to the Egyptian scientists, on the one hand, and according to the Indian scientists, on the other. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot has a single section that lists, for each sign, the three lords of the three decans according to the method of the Egyptian scientists only. The list of planets that serve as lords of the terms in the relevant sign, and the sizes (in degrees) of these terms in their proper order in the relevant sign, according to the Egyptian and Babylonian scientists, on the one hand, and according to Ptolemy, on the other. Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot aggregates in a single section a full list of the terms in all the signs, and the sizes of these terms in their proper order in each sign, according to the Egyptians only, as well as an explanation of how, given some ascendant degree, the lord of the term is determined.

[Fixed Stars and Their Astrological Data]
Each of these stars is accompanied by: (a) its Hebrew translated name, and in a very few cases also the Arabic name behind the Hebrew name, transcribed in Hebrew characters; (b) its ecliptical latitude and longitude at the time of the composition of Reshit Hokhmah; (c) its magnitude (most are of the first and second magnitude, but dim stars and nebulae are also included); and (d) astrological data usually associated with it, such as its planetary mixture or nature, and, in some cases, whether it is one of the stars that cause death.

[Zodiacal Orb Precession]
For the orb of the zodiacal signs revolves from west to east approximately one and a half degrees every century. And behold, in the days of the wise Ptolemy, which was only a thousand years ago, he found Regulus at two degrees, and behold, today it is at eighteen degrees.

[Authorship, Date, and Place of Composition]
Mazzalot. In fact, nowhere in his work does Ibn Ezra cross-reference a book called Sefer Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot; nor can we be certain that the author himself chose that title for the book, even though it appears as such in all the manuscripts I examined. Since the phrase mishpetei ha-mazzalot appears at least five times in its text, meaning 'judgments of the signs,' it is entirely possible that some copyist in the early stages of the original text's transmission decided to make that the book's title. Nevertheless, Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot can be safely attributed to Ibn Ezra for two reasons. The first is that it includes two explicit cross-references to his other works. One is to Sefer ha-Moladot (Book of Nativities), which likely refers to the lost second version of Ibn Ezra's Sefer ha-Moladot. The other is to Sefer ha-Luhot, which would be one of the versions of Ibn Ezra's astronomical tables. The second reason is that all of the Hebrew terminology in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, with one exception, can be found elsewhere in Ibn Ezra's oeuvre, including some rare terms or usages. Indeed, their very rarity creates a terminological link between Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot and the treatises where they appear, allowing us to narrow the range in place and time for Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot's composition. These links suggest that Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot was written late in Ibn Ezra's career, when he was living in Rouen or England. This possibility is strengthened by the report in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot of an astronomical observation made with an astrolabe at latitude 50.5°, which is approximately that of Rouen. The first reference concerns how the Moon's power, compared to other planets, changes when it is in the lunar mansions. The second reference concerns how a planet's power, when in a large horoscopic place, varies compared to its power in an 'equal place' (בית שוה) or 'place of wind' (בית רוח), and how a planet's power, when in a short horoscopic place, varies compared to its power in a 'strained place' (בית דחוק). Neither of these topics is mentioned in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, and the terminology of the second reference is never used in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot or any other part of Ibn Ezra's astrological treatises. To denote the eighth orb, Mm §1:1 uses the expression הגלגל הגדול, 'the great orb.' See the note there. As a rule, Ibn Ezra uses this term to denote the eccentric circle. But the same usage occurs in Yesod Mora' (The Foundation of Piety), a monograph written by Ibn Ezra in England in 1158. For astrological lots, Mm § 51:1 uses גורל; for fixed signs (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio), Mm § 2:3 uses עומדים. As a rule, Ibn Ezra uses גורלות and עומדים for these concepts. See the notes there. But these two rare usages also occur in Tequfah, where the year 4921 AM = 1160/1 CE is mentioned in an illustration. See Tequfah, § 16:3, § 18:1, § 19:3, 385-387, and notes. See Mm § 13:2 and note.

[Ibn Ezra's Other Introductions to Astrology]
Beyond Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, Ibn Ezra composed or was involved to some extent in the creation of several treatises belonging to the genre of astrological introductions. These include the two versions of Sefer ha-Te'amim, the second version of Reshit Hokhmah, and Ysagoge, which forms the first part of the Epitome totius astrologiae, a popular twelfth-century Latin work considered to be within Ibn Ezra's astrological corpus. While the existence of the first two is well-attested and their attribution to Ibn Ezra is certain, the very existence of the third work and its association with him require explanation. We will now survey these works and discuss their connections with Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot. Ibn Ezra wrote the two redactions of Sefer ha-Te'amim to elaborate on the fundamental concepts presented in Reshit Hokhmah. Te'amim I lacks an introduction explaining its purpose but is rich in quotations from Reshit Hokhmah; it is structured into the same 10 chapters, and the beginnings of its glosses correspond to the order in which those words or phrases appear in Reshit Hokhmah. In contrast, in the opening sentence of Te'amim II, Ibn Ezra promises "to lay the foundation of the Book of the Beginning of Wisdom." Nevertheless, even though Te'amim II contains clear quotations from an underlying text, and many parts of Te'amim II are incomprehensible unless one assumes they are commenting on quoted passages, it is virtually impossible to find explicit and obvious quotations from Reshit Hokhmah in Te'amim II. Furthermore, some parts of Te'amim II address concepts related to nativities, which are never discussed in Reshit Hokhmah. Additionally, in many instances where Reshit Hokhmah and Te'amim II discuss similar topics, they do so in a different order. So, what text is Te'amim II commenting on? In four manuscripts, dating from the sixteenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, copyists established a clear link between Te'amim II and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot by arranging sections of these texts in parallel columns. The theory that Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot was the text on which Te'amim II expands was later adopted by Moritz Steinschneider and particularly J.L. Fleischer. A closer examination, however, renders this hypothesis untenable: if Te'amim II comments on quotations and ideas from Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, the latter should contain the vast majority of the quotations, employ the same terminology, and follow the same order of presentation as Te'amim II. But a comparison of parallel sections in Te'amim II and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot demonstrates that Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot meets none of these three requirements. Given that at the very beginning of Te'amim II Ibn Ezra wrote that "I wish to lay the foundation of the Book of Reshit Hokhmah," we are forced to conclude that Te'amim II is commenting on a second redaction of Reshit Hokhmah (henceforth Reshit Hokhmah II). My examination of the entries under "Reshit Hokhmah (by Abraham Ibn Ezra)" in the catalog of the Institute for Microfilmed Hebrew Manuscripts, National Library of Israel, Jerusalem, and in other libraries, found that all of them are copies of Reshit Hokhmah, the text presented in this volume. I then attempted to identify the text of Reshit Hokhmah II, or at least a fragment of it, in manuscripts cataloged under other names, and particularly in anthologies of Hebrew astrological texts that circulated in the Middle Ages and were attributed to Ibn Ezra. This approach proved fruitful. Hidden in a larger work attributed to Abraham Ibn Ezra, titled Sefer ha-She'elot (Book of Interrogations), I found a fragment that, as I showed in a separate study, was part of Reshit Hokhmah II. The main part of the fragment consists of the presentation of 34 categories of signs. In short, my argument is based on the fact that an overwhelming majority of these categories are virtually identical with those commented on in Te'amim II, and that in some cases these categories appear only in the fragment and in Te'amim II. Links between Reshit Hokhmah II, on the one hand, and Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, on the other, will be shown in the notes to these texts. The Epitome totius astrologiae, dated to 1142 and attributed to John of Seville, consists of an introductory book, the Ysagoge in Astrologiam, and the Liber quadripartitus, which addresses the four main subdivisions of Arabic astrology: world astrology, nativities, interrogations, and elections. Charles Burnett first put forward this thesis in Burnett 2002, 75-77. Later, he demonstrated the close links between the Liber primus, de gentibus, regibus, civitatibus, aeris mutatione, fame et mortalitate, the second component of the Liber quadripartitus, and the Tractatus pluviarum et aeris mutationis, most of which comes from Liber primus de gentibus. See Burnett 2008. Recently, Burnett has referred to the links between the Epitome totius astrologiae and Reshit Hokhmah. Smithuis, 2004, especially chapter 3. See Sela 2010.

[Reshit Hokhmah's Wide Diffusion]
Of all Ibn Ezra's astrological works, Reshit Hokhmah had the widest diffusion among Jews in the Middle Ages and afterward, as attested by the fact that it survives in no fewer than 70 manuscript copies (the largest number for any of his astrological treatises).

[Reshit Hokhmah in Southern France]
Within three decades of its author's death, Reshit Hokhmah was circulating throughout the Mediterranean basin, from Provence to Egypt. In the closing years of the twelfth century, a circle of scholars in southern France addressed a series of queries to Maimonides in Egypt, requesting his advice on some troubling issues related to astrology.

[Reshit Hokhmah in Northern France]
Shortly after Ibn Ezra's death, Reshit Hokhmah reached northern France, where Jews were known for their preference for Talmudic studies over science and philosophy. The anonymous Sefer ha-Hayyim, written around 1200 in northern France, employs the terminology of Reshit Hokhmah several times, and an entire passage is based on information drawn from it.

[The Term 'Toledet' in Mahzor Vitry]
Additionally, the astrological section of the earliest manuscript of the Mahzor Vitry, composed in northern France in the twelfth century, employs the peculiar term 'toledet', a neologism coined by Ibn Ezra and used throughout his oeuvre to denote the concept of nature in the context of the zodiacal signs and the four elements.

[Reshit Hokhmah in Encyclopedias]
Starting in the thirteenth century, Reshit Hokhmah was also transmitted by means of excerpts in astrological encyclopedias and anthologies, a sign of its increasing popularity. The earliest of these is Sefer ha-Kolel (the Comprehensive Book), a vast astrological and astronomical encyclopedia composed in 1256 and originally consisting of at least 40 sections, of which only the last nine are extant, in two separate portions.

[Reshit Hokhmah in Liwyat Hen]
Another case is chapter 40, on astrology, of Liwyat hen (Chaplet of Grace), the scientific encyclopedia composed by Levi ben Abraham ben Hayyim (1235-1305) in Provence after 1276. No systematic mapping of this work has been so far carried out, but even a superficial scrutiny discovers extensive quotations from chapter 9 of Reshit Hokhmah and an explicit mention of that work as their source.

[Reshit Hokhmah in Sefer ha-She'elot]
A further example is Sefer ha-She'elot (the Book of Interrogations), written no later than the first years of the fifteenth century. Its header claims Ibn Ezra as the author, but this work, despite its title, is not identical with any of the three redactions of his Sefer ha-She'lot. In fact, it is an anthology of astrological fragments of diverse lengths and origins, taken mainly from Ibn Ezra's astrological treatises.

[Commentaries on Reshit Hokhmah]
The interest in Reshit Hokhmah and its impact on subsequent Jewish thought may also be gauged by the large number of commentaries on it. One of them is the commentary on a collection of Ibn Ezra's astrological treatises composed by 'Maestre Leon,' who was probably the great fourteenth-century philosopher and scientist Gersonides (1288-1344).

[Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot's Diffusion]
Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot is extant in at least 25 manuscript copies, many fewer than Reshit Hokhmah, whose great popularity eclipsed it. However, when we compare this to Ibn Ezra's other astrological treatises, such as Moladot (53 extant copies), Meorot (35 copies), 'Olam I (34 copies), Sheelot I (29 copies), Mivharim II (28 copies), 'Olam II (26 copies), Sheelot II (18 copies), and Tequfah (4 copies), we may infer that Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot enjoyed a relatively wide diffusion.

[Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot in Gersonides' Library]
That Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot was held in high esteem more than 150 years after Ibn Ezra's death and was seen as representative of his entire astrological corpus is evident in the titles of the three items in the catalogue of Gersonides' private library that are clearly astrological. All include the phrase mishpetei ha-mazzalot; in one of them this is a direct reference to Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, showing that the latter was in Gersonides' private library.

[Ibn Ezra's Terminology in Gersonides]
This is confirmed by the fact that Gersonides, in one of his biblical commentaries, employs an astrological expression coined by Ibn Ezra and used by him only in Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Translations for Christian Readers]
Starting in the second half of the thirteenth century, Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot were made available to Christian readers via translations into Old French, Latin, Old Spanish, Catalan, and other European languages. Around that time, Henry Bate of Malines (1246-ca. 1310), a student in theology and the arts at the University of Paris who was proficient in astronomy and astrology, commissioned Hagin le Juif to translate a collection of Ibn Ezra's astrological works from Hebrew into French so that they would be available.

[Manuscript O: Oxford Bodleian Library]
O: Oxford, Bodleian Library, Add. Qu. 160 [Neubauer 2518] (IMHM: F 22230), fols. 141a–154a. This is an octavo paper manuscript of 179 folios, written in a Greek rabbinical script in Thebes in 1367. The manuscript is one of the earliest, if not the earliest, with a collection of astrological works by Ibn Ezra: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 13a–65b; Teamim I, fols. 65b–87b; Moladot, fols. 88a–117b; Me'orot, fols. 118a–126a; Mivharim I, fols. 128b–140a; 'Olam I, fols. 141a–154a; 'Olam II, fols. 165a–167b (written in a seventeenth-century hand). Used as copy text for the critical edition of Reshit Hokhmah.

[Manuscript S: Philadelphia Schoenberg Collection]
S: Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Schoenberg Collection, Ljs 57/2, formerly MS Sassoon 823, (IMHM: F 09357). Vellum, 228 pp. 278 x 210 mm, eight-leaf quires, written in an early Spanish hand, very likely of the fourteenth century. Contains: Tables of Jacob ben David Po'el, pp. 1-25; Reshit Hokhmah, pp. 25-60; Mivharim II (fragment from the introduction), pp. 61-62; She'elot II (beginning is lacking, fragment from the introduction until end of eighth place), pp. 63-68; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, pp. 69-86; 'Olam I, pp. 86-93; Sefer ha-Mivharim li-Batlamyus (Book of Elections by Ptolemy), pp. 93-94; astronomical and calendrical tables, pp. 95-228. Used as copy text for the critical edition of Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot and as one of the witnesses for the critical edition of Reshit Hokhmah.

[Manuscript P: Oxford Bodleian Library]
P: Oxford, Bodleian Library, Opp. 707 [Neubauer 2025] (IMHM: F 19310), fols. 141a–154a. This quarto paper manuscript of 166 folios, written in Sephardi script in 1410, contains: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 1a–46b; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, fols. 48b–65a; Moladot, fols. 65b–90b; Te'amim II, fols. 91b–113a; Sefer ha-She'elot (an anthology of astrological fragments of diverse length and origin, most of them taken from texts by Ibn Ezra), fols. 114a–141b; Sheelot I, fols. 141b–155b; Mivharim I, fols. 156a–165a. Used for the critical editions of Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Manuscript N: New York JTS]
N: New York, Jewish Theological Seminary, Mic 2626 (IMHM: F 28879). Written in a Sephardi script in the fifteenth century, this manuscript contains: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 33a–75b; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, fols. 75b–91a; Moladot, fols. 91b–116b; 'Olam II, fols. 126b-133b; Meorot, fols. 134a–140a; Teamim II, fols. 143b-159b. Used for the critical editions of Reshit Hokhmah and Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Manuscript S: Paris BNF héb. 1055]
S: Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale de France, héb. 1055 (IMHM: F 14658). Vellum, 230x175, Sephardi hand, fourteenth century; written during the lifetime of Qalonymos ben Qalonymos, whose name, on fol. 66a, is followed by the acronym "יח" ("may God protect him and give him life"): Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 1b–27a; Te'amim I, fols. 28b–38a; Sheelot I, fols. 41a–48a; Me'orot, fols. 48b–52b. Used for the critical edition of Reshit Hokhmah.

[Manuscript T: Vatican ebr. 47]
T: Vatican, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, ebr. 47 (IMHM: F 686). Sephardi hand, fourteenth or fifteenth century, with certain peculiarities, such as the consistent use of 'כותב' (= writer) instead of 'כוכב' (= star) to denote Mercury: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 1a–24a; Te'amim I, fols. 24b–34a; Mivharim I, fols. 35b–40a; Mivharim II, fols. 40b–44a; Teamim II, fols. 44a–53a; Me'orot, fols. 53b–56b; Moladot, fols. 57a–69b. Used for the critical edition of Reshit Hokhmah.

[Manuscript S: Paris BNF héb. 1056]
S: Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, héb. 1056 (IMHM: F 14659). This paper manuscript, written in a Sephardi hand in the fifteenth century, contains: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 3a–33b; Te'amim I, fols. 34a–45b; Moladot, fols. 46a–61a; Sheelot I, fols. 62a–69b; Meorot, fols. 70a–73b; Mivharim I, fols. 74a–79a; Olam I, fols. 80a–86a. Used for the critical edition of Reshit Hokhmah.

[Manuscript N: Vatican ebr. 477]
N: Vatican, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, ebr. 477 (IMHM: F 530), fols. 86b–95a. Italian hand, dated 1545; Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 22a–23a; Sheelot II, fols. 53a–67b; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, fols. 67b–86a; 'Olam II, fols. 86b–95a; Mivharim I, fols. 97a-108a; 'Olam I, fols. 108a–121a; Te'amim II, fols. 121b–140a. Used for the critical edition of Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Manuscript S: Paris BNF héb. 1058]
S: Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France, MS héb. 1058 (IMHM: F 22230). Paper and vellum, Sephardi hand, fourteenth century, in two separate parts: (1) Sheelot I, fols. 1a-8b; Mivharim II, fols. 8b-13b; Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot, fols. 13b–26a; Te'amim II, fols. 26b–39b; (2) the last four chapters of a 35-chapter astrological and astronomical anthology, a careful selection of more or less lengthy fragments and complete treatises from the Hebrew astrological and astronomical work of Abraham Bar Hiyya and Abraham Ibn Ezra (fols. 50-194). Used for the critical edition of Mishpetei ha-Mazzalot.

[Manuscript M: Munich Bayerische Staatsbibliothek]
M: Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Cod. Hebr. 202 (IMHM: F 01649). This fifteenth-century manuscript of 163 folios, written in an Italian hand, contains: Reshit Hokhmah, fols. 1a–37a; Teamim II, fols. 37a–52b; Teamim I, fols. 52b–67b; Moladot, fols. 70a–91a; Sheelot I, fols. 91b–101b; Meorot, fols. 101b–108a; Mivharim I, fols. 108b–116b; 'Olam I, fols. 116b-125a; 'Olam II, fols. 138a–144b; Mivharim II.

[Introduction to the Book of Wisdom]
In the name of God, who gives strength to the weary and increases power to the powerless, I begin to write the Book of the Beginning of Wisdom. 1 (1) The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, for it is the foundation. For when a person does not seek after his desires, and his heart is not filled with them, then wisdom will rest within him. (2) Moreover, the fear of the Lord will guard him from the statutes and governance all the days of his life, and when his soul separates from his body, it will bequeath him existence and life forever. (3) And behold, I will begin to recount the laws of the heavens in the way of judgments, as the ancients tested, generation after generation. (4) And after I complete this book, I will compose a book explaining the reasons. (5) And to God I will turn for help. 2 (1) This book is divided into ten gates. (2) The first gate concerns the form of the sphere and its parts, its signs and figures, and the seven planets, their degrees, their movement, and their dominion. (3) The second gate concerns the nature of the signs, their degrees and their actions, and the mixture of the stars and figures. (4) The third gate concerns the nature of the degrees, their strength and their changes, their love and their hatred, and the parts of the quadrants of the sphere, and the twelve houses. (5) The fourth gate concerns the mixture of the seven servants and their strength, and all that they indicate in all created beings that are upon the earth. (6) The fifth gate concerns the words of the servants, when their strength increases and when it diminishes. (7) The sixth gate concerns the strength of the servants themselves, and according to their being before the Sun and after it. (8) The seventh gate concerns the aspects of the servants, and their conjunctions and their mixtures and their differences, and their words that their strength will mix one with another, concerning all that they indicate. (9) The eighth gate concerns the judgments of the servants in questions, and in nativities, and in revolutions. (10) The ninth gate concerns the lots of the servants, and the lots of the houses, and all other lots that the wise men of the signs mentioned. (11) The tenth gate concerns the rising of the light of the seven, their custom and their transfer upon the degrees of the sphere, and all their matters.

[The Heavens and Earth's Movements]
Whoever investigates this wisdom will understand the movement of the seven servants, who are swift in their motion around the degrees of the upper sphere, and their movement in their own spheres, and their being with the upper stars that are in the sphere of the constellations. All these movements are around the solid, which is the Earth, which is like a point within the circle. (2) Then it will become clear in his heart that the aforementioned movements, even though their motion is equally direct, their actions will differ according to the boundaries. (3) And this matter is in the sphere, in the number of degrees of the sphere. (4) And its northern and southern forms, and the knowledge of the seven servants and their effects, and the general and specific rules, and all their actions.

[Chapter 1: Divisions of the Zodiac]
Chapter One. (1) The sphere is divided into three hundred and sixty equal parts called degrees. (2) On this, the opinion of all the ancients and moderns agreed, that this number has fractions from a half to a tenth of a seventh. (3) It is also divided into twelve parts, called signs, and each sign has thirty straight degrees, and each degree has sixty firsts, and each first has sixty seconds, and so on up to tenths.

[Names of the Zodiac Signs]
And the names of the signs are: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. (2) And these are in the upper sphere, which is the eighth, with the northern and southern forms. (3) And behold, in it are forty-eight forms.

[Stars in Zodiac Forms]
And behold, there are among them in the forms of the signs three hundred and forty-six stars.

[Aries Decans and Interpretations]
(21) In its first decan, the figure of a woman, the shining one, rises, and the tail of a sea fish in the form of a viper, and the head of the triangle, and the figure of a bull. (22) The people of India say that in it rises the head of the figure of a dog, with a lamp in its left hand and a key in its right hand. (23) Kanakah, their sage, said that in the first decan rises a dark-skinned man with straight eyebrows, and he is one of the giants, and he praises himself, and he is wrapped in a large white cloak, and he has a rope belt, and he is angry, standing on his feet. (24) And according to Ptolemy, in it rises the back of the Woman Sitting on the Throne, and her knees and her left hand, and half the back of the Woman Who Has No Husband with her thighs and her hem, and the second Fish and some of the flaxen threads. (25) And with the second decan rise fish, and the middle of the triangle, and half a beast, and a woman with a comb on her head, and a copper armor, and the head of the devil. (26) And the people of India say that in it rises the figure of a woman wrapped in clothes and a cloak, and she has one leg and her form is like that of a mare. (27) And according to Ptolemy, the Woman Sitting on the Throne rises, and the head of the Bearer of the Devil and his right hand, and the hem of the Woman Who Has No Husband, and her legs, and the Triangle, and the head of Aries and its horns, and the remainder of the flaxen threads. (28) And in the third decan rises a young man sitting on a throne with a cover and teraphim in his hand, and a man who has lowered his head and is crying out to God; also in it rises the belly of a fish and its head, and the end of the triangle and the other half of the beast. (29) And the sages of India say that in it rises a red man with reddish hair, and he is angry, walking crookedly, and in his hand are wooden bracelets and a scepter, and his clothes are red, and he carries iron, and he wishes to do good but cannot. (30) And according to Ptolemy, the Bearer of the Devil's head and the body of Aries rise. (31) And one born under it will have a mixed body, and a long face and large eyes, and he looks much at the ground, and his neck is thick and his ears are soft, and he has much hair with curly locks, his shins are soft, and his speech is pleasant and he speaks justice often, desiring to eat much, and he loves justice.

[Taurus Decan 3: Figures and Omens]
In its third decan, a young man sitting in a chair, covered, with talismans in his hand, rises, along with a man whose head is bowed, praying to the Lord. The fish's belly and head also rise there, and the end of the triangle, and the second half of the snake. The Indian scientists say that a yellow man with reddish hair rises there; he is irascible and defiant. On his arms are wooden bracelets and he carries a scepter, his clothes are red. He is a blacksmith and wishes to do good but cannot. According to Ptolemy, the Carrier of the Devil's Head [Perseus] and the body of (the constellation) Aries rise (in it). A person born in it [who has Aries as the ascendant of his nativity] will have a mixed body, a long face and large eyes; he will tend to look towards the ground. His neck will be thick and his ears flaccid. He will have abundant curly hair, his shanks will be thin, his speech will be agreeable and he will be garrulous. He will be a glutton, irascible, a lover of justice, and his voice will not be strong. If the Moon was in this sign, or its lot, or one of the malefic planets, it indicates a bad smell, leprosy, deafness, baldness, and a receding hairline. One born in the first decan will be yellow, with a narrow belly and little flesh, and will have a mark on his left leg and likewise on his left arm. He will have many friends and hate evil. One born in the second decan will have darkness with a beautiful face, and his body will be mixed, quick to anger but not holding grudges, high-minded, with complete wisdom and morals, and many enemies. One born in the third decan will be yellow, and astonished by people. This sign rules the head, the face, the pupil of the eye, and the ears. Its ailments are sudden falling without feeling, and pain in the ears, nostrils, teeth, and eyes, and spots that resemble wounds. According to the Egyptian scientists, the pain of Saturn in it is the chest, Jupiter the heart, Mars the head, the Sun the fears, Venus the feet, Mercury the shins, and the Moon the knees. This sign rules among people, kings who are righteous kings, and the generous, and those involved in wars, fire, killing, and blood, and those who travel on roads. It is the house of Mars, and the exaltation of the Sun is at 19 degrees, and the detriment of Saturn is at 21 degrees, and the hatred of Venus, and the place of Mercury's fall is at 20 degrees at this time, which is the year 4908. The lords of the triplicity are the Sun, and after it Jupiter, and by night Jupiter, and after it the Sun, and their partner by day and by night is Saturn. The first decan, according to the Egyptian scientists and most of the foreign scientists, is for Mars, the second for the Sun, and the third for Venus; and according to the Indian scientists, the first decan is for Mars, the second for the Sun, and the third for Jupiter. These are the bounds according to the Egyptian and Babylonian scientists: for Jupiter six degrees, for Venus six, for Mercury eight, for Mars five, and for Saturn five; and according to Ptolemy, for Jupiter six at the beginning, and the second for Venus eight, and the third for Mercury seven, and the fourth for Mars five, and the fifth for Saturn four. The beginning of the novenaries from it is for Mars, and the second for Venus, the third for Mercury, the fourth for the Moon, the fifth for the Sun, the sixth for Mercury, the seventh for Venus, the eighth for Mars, and the ninth for Jupiter; and behold, each novenary is three and one-third degrees, and all the novenaries are according to the nature of the sign and the lord of the sign. And the strength of the twelve: the first for Mars, the second for Venus, the third for Mercury, the fourth for the Moon, the fifth for the Sun, the sixth for Mercury. Its voice is not strong! (32) And if the Moon was in this sign, or its lot, or one of the malefic planets, it indicates a bad smell, leprosy, deafness, baldness, and a receding hairline. (33) One born in the first decan will be yellow, with a narrow belly and little flesh, and will have a mark on his left leg and likewise on his left arm. He will have many friends and hate evil. (34) One born in the second decan will have darkness with a beautiful face, and his body will be mixed, quick to anger but not holding grudges, high-minded, with complete wisdom and morals, and many enemies. (35) One born in the third decan will be yellow, and astonished by people. (36) This sign rules the head, the face, the pupil of the eye, and the ears. (37) Its ailments are sudden falling without feeling, and pain in the ears, nostrils, teeth, and eyes, and spots that resemble wounds. (38) According to the Egyptian scientists, the pain of Saturn in it is the chest, Jupiter the heart, Mars the head, the Sun the fears, Venus the feet, Mercury the shins, and the Moon the knees. (39) This sign rules among people, kings who are righteous kings, and the generous, and those involved in wars, fire, killing, and blood, and those who travel on roads. (40) It is the house of Mars, and the exaltation of the Sun is at 19 degrees, and the detriment of Saturn is at 21 degrees, and the hatred of Venus, and the place of Mercury's fall is at 20 degrees at this time, which is the year 4908. (41) The lords of the triplicity are the Sun, and after it Jupiter, and by night Jupiter, and after it the Sun, and their partner by day and by night is Saturn. (42) The first decan, according to the Egyptian scientists and most of the foreign scientists, is for Mars, the second for the Sun, and the third for Venus; and according to the Indian scientists, the first decan is for Mars, the second for the Sun, and the third for Jupiter. (43) These are the bounds according to the Egyptian and Babylonian scientists: for Jupiter six degrees, for Venus six, for Mercury eight, for Mars five, and for Saturn five; and according to Ptolemy, for Jupiter six at the beginning, and the second for Venus eight, and the third for Mercury seven, and the fourth for Mars five, and the fifth for Saturn four. (44) The beginning of the novenaries from it is for Mars, and the second for Venus, the third for Mercury, the fourth for the Moon, the fifth for the Sun, the sixth for Mercury, the seventh for Venus, the eighth for Mars, and the ninth for Jupiter; and behold, each novenary is three and one-third degrees, and all the novenaries are according to the nature of the sign and the lord of the sign. (45) And the strength of the twelve: the first for Mars, the second for Venus, the third for Mercury, the fourth for the Moon, the fifth for the Sun, the sixth for Mercury.

[Taurus Decan 1: Physical Traits and Character]
The first decan, according to the Egyptian and Persian scientists, (is assigned) to Mercury, the second to the Moon, and the third to Saturn; and according to the Indian scientists, the first decan is for Venus, and the second for Mercury.

[Taurus Terms and Decans]
to the Sun, and the third to Saturn. (38) These are the terms according to the Egyptian sages and all astrologers: for Venus up to eight degrees, then for Mercury six, then for Jupiter eight, then for Saturn five, then for Mars three; and according to Ptolemy: for Venus eight, for Mercury seven, for Jupiter seven, for Mars two, and for Saturn six. (39) The first and second parts of the ninth-part are for Saturn, the third for Jupiter, the fourth for Mars, the fifth for Venus, the sixth for Mercury, the seventh for the Moon, the eighth for the Sun, and the ninth for Mercury. (40) The beginning of the dodecatemoria is for Venus, the second for Mercury, the third for the Moon, the fourth for the Sun, the fifth for Mercury, the sixth for Venus, the seventh for Mars, the eighth for Jupiter, the ninth and tenth for Saturn, the eleventh for Jupiter, and the twelfth for Mars. (41) From the beginning of the sign to the end of three degrees, they are mixed; then two bright degrees, then two empty degrees, then eight bright degrees, then five empty degrees, then three bright degrees, and after them two mixed degrees. (42) From the beginning of the sign up to seven degrees, they are masculine; after them eight feminine degrees, and after that fifteen masculine degrees. (43) The pits of the stars: the fifth degree, and the twelfth, and the eighteenth, and the twenty-fourth, and the twenty-fifth, and the twenty-sixth. (44) The degrees that add grace and honor are the third, and the fifteenth, and the twenty-seventh, and the thirtieth. (45) In this sign, among the upper stars, there is the back of the leper, at the fourteenth degree, with a northern latitude of twenty-two degrees and twenty minutes, of the second magnitude, and of the nature of Venus. (46) And the head of the devil, which is at the fifteenth degree, with a northern latitude of twenty-three degrees and three minutes, of the second magnitude, and of the nature of Venus and Saturn. (47) And there is a bright star called the left eye of the bull, which is at the twenty-eighth degree, with a southern latitude of five and a half degrees, of the first magnitude, and of the nature of Mars and Venus; it is one of the stars that cause death when the lord of life's dominion reaches it. (48) And there is among the dim stars, a star at the tenth degree, with a northern latitude of twenty degrees and forty minutes. (49) And there is another dim star like it at the twelfth degree, with a northern latitude of forty and a half degrees, and it is one of the stars that cause death. According to the sages of India, the first decan is for Venus, the second for Mercury, and the third for Saturn.

[Gemini: Nature and Characteristics]
and its creeping things. (12) All of it indicates things with much movement, and every plant that is with water, and rainwater, and all sweet things. (13) It has the seventh of the climes, and the land of Lesser Armenia and that which is beyond Marqaf, and Azerbaijan, and Eastern Khurasan, and China, and parts of Africa, and Balkh. (14) In its portion are lakes, and every seashore, and every river bank, and trees of medium height. (15) From the letters, Dalet and Peh. (16) Its years are twenty-five, and so are its months, and the days are five, and so are the hours. (17) In the first decan rises the latter half of the Great Bear, and a complete figure wrapped in clothes, which is close to the singing figure; and there also rises an iron pig, its head of copper, and a virgin girl. (18) And the sages of India also said that there rises a handsome youth, clothed, with a golden pendant, and in his face and fingers is a slight deformity, and his body resembles the body of a horse and an elephant, and his legs are white, and on his body hang ornaments like trees, and he sits in a garden where aromatic cane grows. (19) And according to Ptolemy, in it rises the face of the Great Bear, and the head of the earlier and later Twins, and the hindquarters of the earlier Twin and his hands, and the Little Dog, and the remainder of the Great Dog, and the hull of the ship. (20) In the second decan rises a virgin girl, and she resembles a cloud; also rises there half of the dog, and half of the left ear of the donkey. (21) And the sages of India say that there rises a maiden of beautiful speech, and on her head is a myrtle crown, and in her hand a wooden staff, and she seeks wine and music. (22) And according to Ptolemy, in it rises the head of the Great Bear, and the later side of Cancer, and the belly of the ship.

[Third Decan of Cancer]
In the third decan, a virgin rises, sometimes going east and sometimes west; also rising there is the late dog, and the second half of the left donkey's scales, and also the second southern donkey.

[Indian Interpretation of Cancer's Rising]
The Indians say that a man rises there whose leg resembles an animal's leg, and there is an animal on his body, and he intends to board a ship to go to sea to bring gold and silver, to make rings for his wives.

[Ptolemy's View of Cancer's Rising]
According to Ptolemy, the neck of the Great Bear rises there, and its right hand, and the horns of Cancer, and the head of the Fighting Warrior, and the end of the Ship.

[Natives Born in Cancer]
One born in it among humans will have thick limbs, a large forehead, separated teeth, and will be mute and deaf, loving people, and respected; but the nativity of women is not good, for it indicates difficult matters.

[Natives of Cancer's First Decan]
One born in the first decan will be handsome in body and hair, with joined eyebrows, long nostrils, and broad shoulders; he will have a mark under his armpit or on his right arm, and his soul will be good, and he will have many lovers, and he will be deceitful.

[Natives of Cancer's Second Decan]
One born in the second decan will be ruddy, short of stature, and have a thin beard; he will have a black mark in his eyes, and he will be beloved by people.

[Natives of Cancer's Third Decan]
One born in the third decan will be fat, short of stature, with much hair on his eyebrows, a broad chest, and a large belly; he will be mighty, and sometimes he will suffer heartache and greatly exhaust himself.

[Natives Born at End of Cancer]
One born at the end of the sign will not have good fortune.

[Cancer's Influence on Body Parts]
Its portion of the human body is the chest and breasts, the upper abdomen, the ribs, the spleen, and the lung.

[Cancer's Influence on Diseases]
And its portion of diseases includes all that occurs in these limbs; it also causes heaviness in the eyes; and at the twenty-second degree, a cloudy star indicates eye diseases and defects in them; and the sign as a whole indicates boils, itching, leprosy, spots on the face, baldness, and a sparse beard.

[Cancer's Influence on People]
And its portion of human beings includes every despicable person, commoners, sailors, and travelers.

[Enoch's View of Cancer]
And according to Enoch, it is the sign of the world.

[Egyptian Scientists on Planetary Rulerships]
And according to the Egyptian scientists, Saturn rules the loins, Jupiter the pudenda, Mars the upper abdomen, the Sun the legs, Venus the hands, Mercury the neck, and the Moon the head.

[Cancer's Dignities and Debilities]
It is the house of the Moon, and Jupiter's exaltation is at fifteen degrees, and Mars's fall is at twenty-eight degrees, and it is the house of Saturn's detriment; and Jupiter's Head of the Dragon is at the ninth degree, and Saturn's Head of the Dragon is at the nineteenth degree.

[Triplicity Rulers of Cancer]
The lords of the triplicity by day are Venus and then Mars, and by night Mars and then Venus, and their partner by day and by night is the Moon.

[Decan Rulers of Cancer]
The first decan, according to the Egyptians and Babylonians, belongs to Venus, the second to Mercury, and the third to the Moon; and according to the Indian scientists, the first belongs to the Moon, the second to Mars, and the third to Jupiter.

[Terms (Bounds) of Cancer]
These are the terms according to the Egyptian scientists and the astrologers: for Mars seven degrees, for Venus six, for Mercury six, for Jupiter seven, and for Saturn four; and according to Ptolemy: for Mars six, for Jupiter six, for Mercury and Venus seven, and for Saturn four.

[Ninth-Parts of Cancer]
The first ninth-part belongs to the Moon, the second to the Sun, the third to Mercury, the fourth to Venus, the fifth to Mars, the sixth to Jupiter, the seventh and also the eighth to Saturn, and the ninth to Jupiter.

[Dodecatemoria of Cancer]
The first dodecatemoria belongs to the Moon, the second to the Sun, the third to Mercury, the fourth to Venus, the fifth to Mars, the sixth to Jupiter, the seventh and eighth to Saturn, the ninth to Jupiter, the tenth to Mars, the eleventh to Venus, and the twelfth to Mercury.

[Bright and Dark Degrees of Cancer]
From the beginning of the sign to the end of seven degrees, they are mixed, and after them five bright, and after them two mixed, and after them four bright, and after them two dark, and after that eight bright, and after that two dark.

[Masculine and Feminine Degrees of Cancer]
From the beginning of the sign to the end of two degrees, they are masculine, and after them two feminine, and after them eleven masculine, and after them four feminine, and after them three masculine.

[Pits of the Stars in Cancer]
And the pits of the stars: at the twelfth, seventeenth, twenty-third, twenty-sixth, and thirtieth degrees.

[Degrees of Grace and Honor in Cancer]
And the degrees that add grace and honor: the first, the second, the third, the fourteenth, and the fifteenth.

[Fixed Star Al-Shi'ra Al-'Abur in Cancer]
And among the upper stars in it is the dog called Al-Shi'ra Al-'Abur, which is at the third degree at this time, and its southern latitude is thirty-nine degrees and ten minutes, and it is of the first magnitude, a mixture of Jupiter and Mars.

[Fixed Star Head of First Twin in Cancer]
And there is also the Head of the First Twin, which is at eight degrees at this time, and its northern latitude is nine degrees and forty minutes, and it is of the second magnitude, a mixture of Jupiter and Mercury.

[Fixed Star Head of Second Twin in Cancer]
And there is the Head of the Second Twin at the twelfth degree at this time, and its northern latitude is six degrees and fifteen minutes, and it is of the second magnitude, a mixture of Jupiter and Mercury.

[Fixed Star End of Twin's Head in Cancer]
Also there is the end of the Twin's Head, with the nature of Mars alone.

[Fixed Star Al-Shi'ra Al-Ghumaysa in Cancer]
And there is the dog called Al-Shi'ra Al-Ghumaysa at the fifteenth degree at this time, and its southern latitude is sixteen degrees and ten minutes, and it is of the first magnitude, a mixture of Mars and Mercury.

[Dim Stars Near Ursa Major in Cancer]
And there are four dim stars near the Great Bear: the first at the twelfth degree at this time, and its northern latitude is twenty-two degrees and fifty minutes; and the second at the sixteenth degree at this time, and its northern latitude is twenty-two degrees and twenty minutes; and the third at the twenty-seventh degree at this time, and its northern latitude is twenty-two degrees and forty-five minutes, and the fourth at the end of the sign, its northern latitude is twenty degrees.

[Fixed Star on Cancer's Chest]
Also there is a star on its chest at the twenty-sixth degree, and its northern latitude is six minutes.

[Virgo: Places and Letters]
It is difficult to ascend, and all the land of Baghdad, and the palaces of kings and strong fortresses, and every high and steep mountain, and every place whose air is open. (13) Its letters are Heh and Kof. (14) Its years are nineteen, its months are twenty-five, its days are forty-seven and a half, and its hours are twenty-three. (15) In the first decan, a bear and a dog on its back, and a bow, and half a ship and its sailors, and the head of a black animal, and the head of a horse, and the head of a lion ascend. (16) The sages of India say that a large tree ascends, on its branches a bird called Rahma, and a man wearing pleasant clothes, but they are dirty, and in his mind, he is thinking of his father; and also ascends the owner of the horse looking to the left. (17) According to Ptolemy, the neck of Ursa Major, and its left hand, and the head of Leo, and the neck of Hercules, and half of the ship ascend.

[Virgo: First Decan]
(15) In the first decan, a beautiful virgin ascends, with long hair and two ears of grain in her hand; she sits on a throne, and she raises a small boy, nurses him and feeds him; also ascends a man sitting on that throne; also ascends the star called Spica, which is later than the animal, and the head of Corvus and the head of Leo.

[Virgo: Indian and Ptolemaic Decans]
(16) The sages of India say that a virgin ascends, wrapped in a cloak, wearing worn-out clothes, and with a jar in her hand, standing among myrtle, and her desire is to go to her father's house. (17) According to Ptolemy, part of the Dragon's tail ascends, and the latter part of the Bear, and its legs, and the cup which is the head of the warrior, and the end of the warrior's body.

[Virgo: Second Decan Imagery]
(18) In its second decan, a figure clapping its hands and playing music ascends. Half of a man's figure also ascends there; his head is like the head of a bull, and there is half of a naked man in his hand; half of a beam with teeth at its end (Isaiah 41:15), with which he plows the earth, also ascends there; the tail of the black snake and the middle of the lion also ascend there. (19) The Indian scientists say that an Ethiopian ascends there; he is completely covered with hair and wears three garments, one of leather, the second of silk, the third a red cloak; he holds an inkwell and is able to perform calculations. (20) In Ptolemy’s opinion, the end of the Dragon’s tail ascends there, and the tail of the Greater Bear, the head and shoulder of Virgo, and the head, beak, and wings of Corvus.

[Virgo: Third Decan Imagery]
(21) In the third decan, the second half of the figure (of a man) ascends, and the second half of the naked man, the second half of the beam, the tail of the lion, two bulls, and half of the shepherd. (22) The Indian scientists say that a white woman praising herself ascends there; she wears a dyed cloak, her hands are leprous, and she is praying to God. (23) In Ptolemy’s opinion, the end of the Dragon's tail ascends there, and the end of the Greater Bear’s tail, the shoulder of the southern Monkey, the edge of its belly, the belly of Corvus, and the leg of the Animal.

[Virgo: Nativities and Body Parts]
(24) A person born in it will be of fine stature, with a straight and handsome body; he will know and understand; his hair will not be curly. He will love justice, his voice will be strong, he will be barren and benevolent, his face will be handsome, he will be a scribe and versed in mathematics. (25) One who is born in the second decan will be handsome; his eyes will be small and his nose beautiful; he will be moral, modest, generous, and love to be praised. (26) One who is born in the third decan, too, will be handsome, moral, and right-thinking, modest and wise. (27) Its portion of the human body is the stomach, the intestines, and the diaphragm. (28) The diseases affecting the aforementioned parts of the body are in its portion, and every disease whose cause is black bile.

[Virgo: Professions and Dignities]
(29) Of human beings, middle-class people are in its portion, and scribes, scholars, mathematicians, geometricians, women, eunuchs, and the practitioners of any craft that promotes laughter. (30) It is the house of Mercury, its dignity is fifteen degrees, and the detriment of Venus is at twenty-seven degrees, and it is the house of Jupiter's hatred, and its exaltation is at twenty-three degrees at this time.

[Virgo: Triplicity and Decan Rulers]
(31) The lords of the triplicity by day are Venus and then the Moon, and by night the Moon and then Venus, and their partner by day and by night is Mars. (32) The first decan, according to the Egyptians and Babylonians, is for the Sun, the second for Venus, and the third for Mercury. And according to the people of India, the first is for the Sun, the second for Saturn, and the third for Venus.

[Virgo: Terms and Ninth Parts]
(33) These are the terms according to the Egyptians and the astrologers: for Mercury seven degrees, for Venus ten, for Jupiter four, for Mars seven, and for Saturn two; and according to Ptolemy: for Mercury eight, for Venus six, for Jupiter ten, for Mars five, and for Saturn two. (34) The beginning of the ninth part is for Saturn, also the second is for him, and the third for Jupiter, and the fourth for Mars, and the fifth for Venus, and the sixth for Mercury, and the seventh for the Moon, and the eighth for the Sun, and the ninth for Mercury.

[Virgo: Dodecatemoria and Degrees]
(35) The beginning of the dodecatemoria is for Mercury, the second for Venus, the third for Mars, the fourth for Jupiter, the fifth for Saturn, the sixth for Saturn, the seventh for Jupiter, the eighth for Mars, the ninth for Venus, the tenth for Mercury, the eleventh for the Moon, and the twelfth for the Sun. (36) From the beginning of the sign to the end of five degrees, they are mixed, and after them four bright, and after them two that have nothing in them, and after them nine bright, and after them ten mixed. (37) And from the beginning of the sign to the end of seven degrees, they are feminine, and after them five masculine, and after them eight feminine, and after them ten masculine.

[Virgo: Star Pits and Fixed Stars]
(38) The pits of the stars: the eighth, thirteenth, sixteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-fifth. (39) And the degrees that add grace and honor are the second, fifth, seventeenth, and twentieth. (40) And there, among the superior stars, is the tail of Leo at the tenth degree at this time, and its northern latitude is eleven degrees, and it is of the first magnitude, of the nature of Saturn and Venus. (41) Also, there is one star at the aforementioned degree, but its northern latitude is twenty-five degrees, and it is of the second magnitude, of the nature of Saturn and Venus. (42) And there are two dark stars between Ursa Major and Leo: one at the eleventh degree at this time, and its northern latitude is twenty degrees and forty minutes; and the other at the aforementioned degree, but its northern latitude is twenty-five and a half degrees.

[Libra Decans: Ptolemy's View]
According to Ptolemy, the end of the Little Bear's hand rises, and the tip of the Dragon's tail, and the left crown, and the thighs and feet of Libra, and the crown of Scorpio.

[Scorpio: General Characteristics]
Scorpio. One of the water signs, feminine, one of the nocturnal signs, northern. One of the winter signs, and it remains in one way [fixed]. Its hours are shorter than the equal ones, and its ascensions are straight and long. It indicates any unbalanced humor, which has a change in taste that is of little benefit to life.

[Scorpio: Qualities and Appearance]
It trembles and shines; its beginning is changing and moist, its middle is mixed, and its end is noisy. When it is northern, it is moist, and when it is southern, it is cold. It is in the form of a scorpion. Its portion is the north-left, and a northern wind. The humor that dominates a person; and its taste, everything salty and bland; and the color of its appearance, red and green and the color of dust.

[Scorpio: Associated Creatures and Plants]
Its portion of living things includes scorpions, wild beasts, creeping things of the earth, and water creatures; and all running waters, and sea waters, and all plants that are in water like corals; and among plants, trees of medium height.

[Scorpio: Regions and Places]
Its portion of regions includes the third, and the land of Cush, Arabia, Tania, and Cyprus. It has a share in vineyards and gardens, but only in places of despair and desolate places.

[Scorpio: Letters, Years, and Hours]
Its letters are Tet and Shin-Yod-Tzadi. Its years are fifteen, and its months are like them, and the days are thirty-seven and a half, and the hours are four.

[Scorpio First Decan: Rising Figures]
In the first decan, the hindquarters of a horse rise, and the hindquarters of an ox, and a black man with a stick in his hand. The Indian scientists said that the figure of a beautiful woman rises there, her body red, and she is pregnant. According to Ptolemy, the hand of the Little Bear rises, and the head of the Dog and its right arm, and the middle of Libra.

[Scorpio Second Decan: Rising Figures]
In the second decan, a naked man rises, and the middle of a horse and the middle of an ox. The Indian scientists said that a woman leaving her house rises there, naked and possessing nothing, entering the sea. According to Ptolemy, the end of the Little Bear's hand rises, and the tip of the Dragon's tail, and the left crown, and the thighs and feet of Libra, and the crown of Scorpio.

[Scorpio Third Decan: Rising Figures]
In the third decan, the beginning of a horse rises, and the bearer of the hare, and the beginning of an ox. The Indian scientists said that a dog rises there, and two pigs, and a large leopard with white hair, and various kinds of hunting. According to Ptolemy, the form of the Little Bear rises, and the leg of one walking on his knees, and his right shoulder and arm, and the belly of Scorpio, and the head of the censer.

[Pisces: First Decan]
In the first decan, there rises half a horse with two wings, and the beginning of the river, and the tail of the fish called Timsah.

[Pisces: First Decan (Indian Scholars)]
The Indian scholars say that in the first decan, a man rises who is dressed in beautiful clothes, and in his hand is an iron tool, and he goes to the sea.

[Pisces: First Decan (Ptolemy)]
According to Ptolemy, the end of the tail of the Little Bear, and the belly of the second horse, and the beginning of the first fish rise there.

[Pisces: Second Decan]
In the second decan, half of the river rises, and the second half of him who walks on his knees.

[Pisces: Second Decan (Indian Scholars)]
The Indian scholars say that a beautiful white woman rises there, and she is sitting in a ship in the sea and wants to go out onto dry land.

[Pisces: Second Decan (Ptolemy)]
According to Ptolemy, the tail of the Little Bear, and the hand of the one sitting on the chair, and the shoulder of the woman who has not seen a husband, and the head of the woman who shares with the horse, and the hindquarters of the first fish rise there.

[Pisces: Third Decan]
In the third decan, the end of the river rises, and the end of the fish called Al-Timsah, and what remains of him who walks on his knees.

[Pisces: Third Decan (Indian Scholars)]
The Indian scholars say that a naked man rises there, with his leg on his belly, and a spear in his hand, and he cries out from fear of robbers and fire.

[Pisces: Third Decan (Ptolemy)]
According to Ptolemy, the end of the tail of the Little Bear, and the middle of the back of the one sitting on the chair, and the chest of the woman who has not seen a husband, and a part of the thread rise there.

[Nature of Stars in Leo's Body Parts]
Its waist is of the nature of Venus, and the stars in its thighs are of the nature of Venus and somewhat of Mercury. (8) And those in the head of Virgo, at the end of its right wing, are of the nature of Mercury and somewhat of Mars; and those in the hips are of the nature of Venus; and those in the left wing are a mixture of Saturn and Mercury; and the star called Simak al-A'zal is of the nature of Venus and somewhat of Mercury; and the stars in its legs are of the nature of Mercury and somewhat of Mars. (9) And the two stars on the pan of Libra are a mixture of Jupiter and Mercury. (10) And the star in the claws of Scorpio is of the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Mercury and Mars; and the bright stars on the back of Scorpio are of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Saturn, and its heart is of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Jupiter, and that in its tail is of the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Venus; and the nebulous stars there are a mixture of Mars and the Moon. (11) And the nebulous stars in Sagittarius are a mixture of Mercury and the Moon; and those in the back of Sagittarius are of the nature of Jupiter and somewhat of Mercury; and the legs of the horse are a mixture of Jupiter and Saturn, and the stars of its tail are of the nature of Venus and somewhat of Saturn. (12) And those in the mouth of Capricorn are of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Venus, and those in its belly are a mixture of Mars and Mercury, and in its tail are a mixture of Saturn and Mercury. (13) And those in the shoulder of Aquarius and its left hand are a mixture of Saturn and Mercury, and in its nostrils are of the nature of Mercury and somewhat of Saturn, and those in the stream are of the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Jupiter. (14) And in the head of Pisces are of the nature of Mercury and somewhat of Saturn, and in its belly are a mixture of Jupiter and Mercury, and in its tail are of the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Mercury, and those in its belly on the northern side are of the nature of Jupiter and somewhat of Venus; and those at the end of Pisces are of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Mercury.

[Northern Constellations and Star Natures]
(1) These are the stars that are in the northern part of the ecliptic. (2) The bright ones in Ursa Minor are a mixture of Saturn and somewhat of Venus. (3) And those in Ursa Major, which are 'Ayish and her sons, are a mixture of the Moon and Venus. (4) And the bright ones that are with Draco are a mixture of Saturn and Mars. (5) And the Blazing One is a mixture of Jupiter and Saturn. (6) And those in the bed of the Armed Warrior are a mixture of Saturn and Mercury. (7) And the bright one in the Northern Crown is a mixture of Venus and Mercury. (8) And the one crawling on his knees is of the nature of Mercury. (9) And the bright one which is the Falling Eagle is a mixture of Venus and Mercury. (10) And similarly, the bright one called the Hen. (11) And those in the Woman Sitting on the Throne are a mixture of Venus and Saturn. (12) And those of the Horseman Carrying the Devil's Head are a mixture of Saturn and Jupiter, and those on his sword are a mixture of Mars and Mercury. (13) And the bright one called Al-Ayyuq is a mixture of Mars and Mercury. (14) And those in the Carrier of the Serpent are of the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Venus, and those on his back are a mixture of Saturn and Mars. (15) And the Flying Eagle is a mixture of Jupiter and Mars. (16) And the stars of the fish called Dolphin are a mixture of Saturn and Mars. (17) And the bright ones in the Bow are a mixture of Mars and Mercury. (18) And the stars that are in the Woman Who Has Not Seen a Husband are of the nature of Venus. (19) And those in the Triangle are of the nature of Mercury.

[Southern Constellations and Star Natures]
(1) These are the southern stars with respect to the ecliptic. (2) The bright one in the mouth of the Southern Fish is a mixture of Venus and Mercury. (3) And the one in the Animal is of the nature of Saturn. (4) And on the shoulder of the Hero is a mixture of Mars and Mercury, and the rest of the bright ones are a mixture of Saturn and Jupiter. (5) And the stars of the River are a mixture of Saturn and Jupiter. (6) And the stars of the Hare are a mixture of Saturn and Mars. (7) And the stars that are around the rear of the Dog are a mixture of Venus and Mercury. (8) And those in the mouth of the Dog, which is Al-Shi'ra al-Ghumaysa', are of the nature of Jupiter and somewhat of Mars. (9) And the stars of the Warrior are of the nature of Saturn and Venus. (10) And those in the Ship are of the nature of Saturn and Mars; and the bright one called Kesil is of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn, and the two dim ones are a mixture of Venus and Mercury.

[Aspects, Their Types, and Meanings]
called Kesil, is of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn, and the two dim ones are a mixture of Venus and Mercury. (11) And those in the form of the Horse are a mixture of Venus and Jupiter, and the bright ones on the throat are of the nature of Venus and somewhat of Mars. (12) And those in the Southern Crown are of the nature of Mercury. (13) And the stars of the Painter are a mixture of Saturn and Mercury. (14) And the stars of the Censer are of the nature of Jupiter and somewhat of Mercury. These are the stars that the ancients observed. §3 (1) The Third Chapter: On the aspects of the degrees of the zodiac, their love and hatred, and the matters of the quadrants of the zodiac and its twelve parts, and what they indicate at every moment. (2) The aspect is in four ways: the sextile aspect, the quartile aspect, the trine aspect, and the opposition aspect. (3) And the signs of aspect are seven: the third, the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, the ninth, the tenth, and the eleventh. (4) And the aspect to the third and to the eleventh is a sextile aspect, and the aspect to the fourth and to the tenth is a quartile aspect, and the aspect to the fifth and to the ninth is a trine aspect, and the aspect to the seventh is an opposition aspect. And the aspect to the third, fourth, and fifth is left, and the aspect to the ninth, tenth, and eleventh is right. (5) The sextile aspect is a sixth of the zodiac, which is sixty degrees; and the quartile aspect is a fourth of the zodiac, which is ninety degrees; and the trine aspect is a third of the zodiac, which is one hundred and twenty degrees; and the opposition aspect is half the zodiac, which is one hundred and eighty degrees. (6) And an example of this is if the rising sign is the beginning of Aries; then its left sextile aspect will be at the beginning of Gemini, and its right sextile aspect at the beginning of Aquarius; its left quartile aspect at the beginning of Cancer, and its right quartile aspect at the beginning of Capricorn; its left trine aspect at the beginning of Leo, and its right trine aspect at the beginning of Sagittarius; and the opposition aspect at the beginning of Libra. (7) And the strongest of the aspects is the opposition aspect, and after it in strength is the quartile aspect, and after the quartile aspect in strength is the trine aspect, and the weakest of all is the sextile aspect. (8) And the opposition aspect is complete enmity, and the quartile aspect is half enmity, and the trine aspect is complete love, and the sextile aspect is half love. (9) And the signs between which there is no aspect and no mixture are four: the second, the sixth, the eighth, and the twelfth; and

[Aspects and Quadrants]
The weakest among them are the sixth and the twelfth. The Sun is a star. And those in the constellation of the Horse are a mixture of Venus. And the stars of the color are a mixture of Saturn and the Sun. The aspect to the third and eleventh is a sextile aspect, and the aspect to the fourth and tenth is a quartile aspect, and the aspect to the fifth and ninth is a trine aspect. And the aspect to the seventh is an opposition aspect. And the aspect to the third, fourth, and fifth is left. And the aspect to the ninth, tenth, and eleventh is right. Its sextile. The southern. And its trine aspect. The right. Quartile. And after it, trine. And a trine aspect is complete love, and a sextile aspect is half love.

[Zodiacal Relationships and Planetary Rulerships]
Some signs are antagonistic in aspect but loving in another way, because they are on the same calculation path in their ascensions, or in power, or in the ecliptic. And those whose ascensions are equal are: Aries and Pisces, Virgo and Libra, Taurus and Aquarius, Leo and Scorpio, Gemini and Capricorn, and Cancer and Sagittarius. And those that are of one power, every sign whose distorted hours are equal, like Cancer with Gemini, and Taurus with Leo, and Aries with Virgo, and Pisces with Libra, and Aquarius with Scorpio, and Capricorn with Sagittarius. And the planet that is in one of the straight signs is called the ruler, and that which is opposite its degree in one of the crooked signs is the servant. And the signs that are in the ecliptic calculation are understood, every pair of signs that are houses for one planet, like Aries and Scorpio for Mars, and Taurus and Libra for Venus, and Gemini and Virgo for Mercury, and Sagittarius and Pisces for Jupiter, and Capricorn and Aquarius for Saturn; even though the Moon has one house and the Sun has one house, because both are rulers, their houses are considered to be for one ruler. And Aries and Libra, and Capricorn and Cancer, and Virgo and Pisces, and the others, even though they are of the same active nature, there is enmity between them because of the opposition aspect.

[Divisions of the Zodiac and Elemental Correspondences]
And the circle is divided at every moment of the hours into four parts. For the quadrant of the circle that is from the midheaven line to the ascendant degree is eastern and masculine, advancing; and what resembles it in the four roots is air; and in the human body, blood; and in the seasons of the year, the time of heat; and from the divisions of the quarters of day and night, the first part; and from the years of man, the time of childhood; and from the appearance of the eyes, whiteness. And the quadrant that is from the midheaven line to the descendant degree is southern, and weak like a female, and its actions are retreating; and what resembles it in the four roots is fire; and from the seasons of the year, summer; and from the quarters of day and night, the second part; and in the human body, red bile; and from the time of his years, youth; and the color of its appearance, red. And the quadrant that is from the descendant degree to the degree of the Imum Coeli is western, with masculine power, and it advances; and what resembles it in the roots is earth; and in the seasons of the year, winter; and from the quarters of day and night, the third quarter; and in the human body, black bile; and from his years, when he is close to fifty; and the color of its appearance, black. And the quadrant that is from the Imum Coeli line to the ascendant degree is northern, like a female, retreating; and what resembles it in the roots is water; and in the seasons of the year, cold; and from the quarters of day and night, the last quarter; and in the human body, cold mixed with phlegm; and from his years, the days of old age and gray hair; and the color of its appearance, green.

[Hemispheres and House Strengths]
And everything that is of the circle above the earth, which is from the ascendant degree to the descendant, is called right; and what is below the earth, left. Also, the two quadrants that are masculine are called right, and those that are like females are called left. And the two quadrants, which are from the midheaven to the ascendant degree and from the ascendant degree to the Imum Coeli, are called the ascending half of the circle; and the other half, which is from the Imum Coeli to the descendant degree and from the descendant degree to the midheaven line, is the descending half of the circle.

[The Twelve Houses and Their Strengths]
And at every moment the circle is divided into twelve parts, according to the number of the signs, and they are called houses. And four of them are called by one name, and these are the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses; all four are called angles because they are like points. And the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh, all four are called by one name, as they are succedent to the angles. And the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses, all four are called by one name, as they are weak. And the angles are stronger than the succedent houses, and the succedent houses are stronger than the weak ones. And the strongest among the angles are the first and tenth, and the strongest among the succedent houses are the fifth and eleventh, and the strongest among the weak ones are the sixth and ninth. And at every moment the houses of the circle will be similar to the four roots; and behold, a similarity is given in the angles, for when the ascendant is Aries, which is of the nature of fire, the midheaven will be Capricorn, which is of the nature of earth, and the descendant Libra, which is of the nature of air, and the Imum Coeli Cancer, which is of the nature of water; and so is the way of the succedent and weak houses. And these twelve houses are fundamental in a person's birth, and in questions and elections, and also in the judgments of the world, which are the general ones.

[The First House and Its Triplicities]
The first house is the ascendant from the beginning of the eastern line, and it signifies life and bodies, and speech and knowledge, and fertility and the beginning of all actions, and what is rooted in human thought, and from the years of man it signifies his beginning. And the lord of the first triplicity signifies life, and the nature of the native and the querent, and his desires, and all that will happen to him, good or bad, in the beginning of his life. And the lord of the second triplicity signifies the body, and strength, and the middle years of a person. And the lord of the third triplicity, who is the partner, is associated with its companions regarding all their indications and indicates the end of the human years.

[The Second House and Its Triplicities]
The second house signifies money and property, and trade, and food, and helpers and those who bow down, and witnesses, and keys, and treasures. And the lord of the first triplicity signifies money in the beginning of a person's life. And the lord of the second triplicity signifies the middle of his life, and the lord of the third triplicity signifies the end of his life.

[The Third House and Its Triplicities]
The third house signifies brothers and sisters, and relatives, and in-laws, and wisdom, and humility, and counsel, and faith, and letters, and rumors, and journeys. And the lord of the first triplicity signifies the older brothers, and the lord of the second triplicity signifies the middle brothers, and the lord of the third triplicity signifies the younger brothers.

[Eighth House: Death and Inheritance]
The eighth house signifies death, inheritance, deposits, separation, fear, sadness, and loss. The first lord of the triplicity signifies death, the second signifies anything ancient, and the third signifies inheritance.

[Ninth House: Journeys and Wisdom]
The ninth house signifies journeys and roads, anyone who is removed from their position, wisdom, faith, worship of God, messengers, rumors, dreams, oaths, signs and wonders, laws and judgments. The first lord of the triplicity signifies journeys, the second signifies faith, and the third signifies wisdom.

[Tenth House: Mother and Profession]
The tenth house signifies the mother, kingship, reputation, and every craft. The first lord of the triplicity signifies the mother, the second signifies one's status, and the third signifies one's craft.

[Eleventh House: Friends and Hope]
The eleventh house signifies honor, grace, a good name, hope, lovers, friends, the king's ministers, his treasurers, and clothing. The first lord of the triplicity signifies the hope of thought, the second signifies friends, and the third signifies whether they are good or bad for him.

[Twelfth House: Sadness and Enemies]
The twelfth house signifies sadness, poverty, jealousy, hatred, fear, deceit, resentment, prisons and captivity, every dishonor, blows, and animals used for human transport. The first lord of the triplicity signifies sadness, the second signifies prisons, and the third signifies enemies.

[Chapter Four: The Seven Planets]
Chapter Four: On the mixture of the seven planets, their power, and all that they signify. I will begin by mentioning Saturn because it is the highest of all, for it is in the seventh sphere opposite the Earth. Saturn. Cold and dry, its nature is bad, harmful; it signifies corruption, destruction, death, sadness, mourning, weeping and groaning, and ancient matters.

[Saturn's Influence on the Soul and Lands]
Of the human soul, the faculty of thought is in its portion. And the first climate of the Earth's regions is its, which is the land of India.

[Saturn's Influence on Peoples and Professions]
Of the nations, the Ethiopians, the Jews, and the Berbers are in its portion. And in general: all the elderly, farmers, builders, tanners, latrine cleaners, slaves, despicable people, thieves, diggers of pits and graves, and those who handle the shrouds of the dead.

[Saturn's Influence on Metals and Stones]
Of the Earth's metals, black lead and rusty iron are in its portion; and black stones, and everything that is blue-black, and the lodestone, and every heavy and black stone.

[Saturn's Influence on Places]
Of places on Earth, caves, wells, pits, prisons, every dark and uninhabited place, and cemeteries are in its portion.

[Saturn's Influence on Animals]
Of animals, elephants, camels, and every animal that is large and ugly, such as pigs, wolves, monkeys, black dogs, and black cats.

[Saturn's Influence on Birds]
Of birds, every large bird with a long neck is in its portion, such as the ostrich, the vulture, and the bustard, and every bird whose voice is desolate, and the raven, and the bat, and every bird whose appearance is black.

[Saturn's Influence on Creeping Animals]
Of creeping animals of the earth, fleas, bedbugs, flies, mice, and every destructive and foul-smelling creeping creature that is within the earth.

[Saturn's Influence on Trees and Plants]
Of trees, the gall-oak, the carob, the gum called azarole, and every tree that has thorns, is harmful and bears no fruit, and lupine, lentils, and millet.

[Saturn's Influence on Medicines and Tastes]
Of the types of medicines, the cactus called aloe, al-halelig, al-balelig, and al-amaleg, and these are like the prunas that come from the land of India, and any tree that has a deadly poison, and anything bitter, like wormwood. In general, every plant that is black, with a cold and dry nature, an astringent taste that paralyzes the tongue, and anything whose taste is unpleasant and has a putrid smell.

[Saturn's Influence on Aromatics and Garments]
Of aromatics, al-qist, which is called costus, and qashur al-'ud, which are tree barks, and al-saliba and al-mi'ah, which is called frankincense. Of garments, cloaks, woolen clothes, mattresses, and every thick garment.

[Saturn's Influence on Human Nature]
Of human nature, thought is in its portion, and taciturnity, and deceit, and isolating oneself from people, and overcoming them, and being victorious, and violence, and anger, and keeping one's word, and depth of thought, and knowledge of hidden things, and worshipping God, and seducing people, and rebelling, and fearing, and worrying, and having strong desires; and in general, persisting in one path, which is of little benefit and much harm.

[Saturn's Influence on Crafts and Occupations]
Of its portion are tilling the land, building, mining metals, searching for hidden treasures, digging, listening to the words of the dead, and anything that lasts for many days. And in its portion is every craft that is exhausting and of little benefit, and every lowly craft such as quarrying stones, cleaning latrines, and every dirty craft.

[Saturn's General Significations]
It signifies fathers, the elderly, the dead, weeping, separation, wandering, poverty, destitution, lowliness, long journeys that are bad and dangerous, and one who is unsuccessful in all his endeavors.

[Saturn's Influence in a Nativity]
If it is dominant in a person's nativity, it will give him all the good it possesses from its nature, if it is in a good place with respect to the Sun and the parts of the sphere and the parts of the moment, as I will explain. But if the opposite is true, it will give him every despicable thing.

[Saturn with Other Planets]
And when it is in a high degree, if a benefic planet is in conjunction with it, then all its matters will turn to good, if the benefic planet is in its high degree. But if it is in a low degree, its benefit will be small. And if a malefic planet is in conjunction with it, and both are strong, then it signifies great victory and violence, as above. But if the malefic planet is not strong, then it will give him every despicable and lowly thing, such as dishonor and shame, and all this I will explain in the book of nativities.

[Saturn's Influence on Physical Appearance]
And if Saturn is solitary in the form of a person, then his stature will be upright, and his appearance will be intermediate between white and black, and he will be humble, and respected, and strong, and his hair will be black and curly, and he will have hair on his chest, and his eyes will be medium-sized, and he will have much cold and phlegm. And all this is if Saturn is oriental with respect to the Sun, as I will explain. But if it is occidental, he will be thin, and his hair will not be curly, and his nature will be cold and dry. And in general, it signifies one who is ugly in form and appearance, with much hair on his body, and thick nostrils, and thick lips and teeth, and his smell is foul.

[Saturn's Influence on Body Parts]
Of the human body, the bones, the spleen, the right ear, the place of urine, and the red bile are in its portion.

[Saturn's Influence on Illnesses]
And its illnesses are madness, foolishness, trembling, paralysis, the disease that causes a person to bleed, and leprosy, and foot ailments, and every pain that lasts for many days, and every cold and dry illness that comes from cold and dryness.

[Saturn's Influence on Life Stages and Directions]
Of the years of a person's life, old age and the end are in its portion. And of the directions, East.

[Jupiter's Influence on Nativity]
(21) If it [Jupiter] rules alone over a person's nativity, it will give him everything honorable, and the opposite applies if it is not in its strength. (22) The planets increase and diminish (these indications) when they are associated with it, whether by conjunction or aspect: if the planets are malefic, they will diminish its good fortune; if benefic, they will increase its good fortune.

[Jupiter's Physical Manifestations]
(23) Regarding a person's form, if it [Jupiter] is oriental, it signifies a fine stature, a body appearance white with some redness, sparse hair, beautiful eyes, and he is a respected person in all his actions, and his nature is hot and moist. (24) But if it is occidental, his body will be straight, but his whiteness will not be pure, and his head hair will be the opposite of curly, and he will be bald, and moisture will abound in him. (25) In general, it indicates a person with a good soul, good inclination, beautiful eyes, a handsome beard, and thin hair.

[Jupiter's Associations]
(26) In its portion of the human body are the liver, the left ear, the ribs, and all blood. (27) Of its infirmities, every disease that passes quickly. (28) Of the ages of man, the time between youth and old age. (29) Of eye colors, white, green, saffron, straight, and any beautiful and shining color. (30) Of the directions, the left (north). (31) Of the days, Thursday, and of the nights, Monday night, and of their hours, the first and eighth. (32) Of the letters, Chet, Samekh, and Bet, and this shape =. (33) Its greatest years are 427, the great 79, the middle 45 and a half, and the least 12. (34) The years of the al-fardar portion are 12. (35) The strength of its body is nine degrees, before it and after it.

[Mars: Nature and Influence]
(1) Mars. Hot, dry, burning. (2) Harmful and destructive; it signifies ruin, drought, outbreaks of fire, rebellion, bloodshed, killing, war, quarrels, blows, and separation. (3) In general: everything that is not according to its proper form and order. (4) In its portion of human nature is anger.

[Mars' Terrestrial and Human Associations]
(5) In its portion of the Earth, the third climate, such as Egypt and Alexandria. (6) Of the nations, the Magi, who are the people of England and fire-worshippers. (7) In its portion of human beings are all people of war and their officers, robbers, ironworkers, blacksmiths, makers of spears and swords, bloodletters, those who tend animals, and the like.

[Mars' Material and Animal Associations]
(8) Of the Earth's metals, iron and red copper; and sulfur, naphtha, glass vessels, all weapons, and all red stones. (9) In its portion are fortresses, towers, and furnaces. (10) Of the animals, hyenas, dogs, and the leopard. (11) Of the birds, al-buzi'ah, which is astor. (12) Of the creeping things of the earth, all that are harmful, like the adder, and the scorpion, and every creature with deadly poison.

[Mars' Plant and Medicinal Associations]
(13) Of the trees, the bramble, pears, and that called al-baq'am, which is a tree used for dyeing, and similarly 'asphur, and al-fawah, and every tree that has thorns, and pepper, and mustard, and cumin, and radish, and leeks, and garlic, and al-sadab, which is ruda. (14) Of the types of medicines, astok, and tarbad, and sababing, and zarion water, and padbon, and scammony, and persion, and karbin, and every tree that is immediately harmful, and everything whose taste is bitter and sharp and not pleasant.

[Mars' Aromatic and Clothing Associations]
(15) Of the types of perfumes, sandalwood, and saffron, which is turmeric. (16) Of the garments, rabbit skins and sable, and garments dyed with crimson.

[Mars' Influence on Human Character]
(17) In its portion of human nature are speed, bravery, victory, strength, quarreling, fighting, violence, anger, speaking insults, curses, falsehood, slander, fornication, impudence, not keeping covenants, false oaths, permitting every prohibition in the Torah, theft, and every evil deed, cruelty, great toil, going from place to place, entering dangers, afflicting people, striking, imprisoning and capturing, taking money, undermining walls and tempting doors and revealing every hidden thing; and the general rule: it is all evil, and there is no good in it.

[Mars' Destructive Indications]
(18) It signifies brothers, and those who quarrel, and the covenant of the child with its mother, and the miscarriage of a woman, and every evil thing that happens suddenly, and all robbery and all breakage.

[Mars' Influence on Nativity and Appearance]
(19) If it [Mars] rules alone over a person's nativity, it will give him the good it possesses if it is in its strength and benefic planets aspect it; and the opposite applies if it is not in its strength and malefic planets are associated with it. (20) If it is oriental to the Sun, the native will be tall, and his appearance white tending to reddishness, and he will have much hair on his body. And if it is occidental, he will be short in stature, and his appearance red, and his face round, and his eyes small, and his red hair not curly, and the nature of his body dry.

[Mars' General Physical and Character Traits]
(21) And the general rule: it signifies anyone whose appearance is ugly and whose eyes are like a cat's, and he is ugly in appearance, and has marks and spots on his face, and his actions are hasty, impulsive, and mad.

[Mars' Bodily Associations]
(22) In its portion of the human body are the gallbladder, the right nostril, the tendons, the testicles, and the limb. (23) In its portion are red bile and burnt blood.

[Mars: Infirmities and Ages]
Among its infirmities are acute fever, consumption, red pustules that appear on the human body, fear, madness, bruises, and burns. (25) Among the ages of man, youth is in its portion.

[Mars: Color, Direction, Days, and Hours]
Its color is very red. (27) Among the directions, the west. (28) Among the days, Tuesday; among the nights, the night of Shabbat; and among their hours, the first and the eighth.

[Mars: Letters, Shapes, and Years]
Among the letters of speech are Tzadi, Qof, and Yod, and among the shapes is this: ;, and some say this: 4. (30) Its greatest years are two hundred eighty-four, the great years sixty-six, the middle years forty and a half, and the small years fifteen. (31) The years of the part called al-fardar are seven years. (32) And the power of its body is eight degrees, before it and after it.

[The Sun: Nature and Influence]
The Sun. Hot and dry in moderation, it benefits and harms, and it does good and evil.

[The Sun: Light and Soul]
Light and the sensitive soul are its portion.

[The Sun: Climates and Lands]
Among the climates, the fourth climate is its portion, including Babylon, Iraq, and the land of Israel.

[The Sun: Nations and People]
Among the nations, Edom, Turch, and Dailam. (5) Among human beings, kings, ministers, and counselors.

[The Sun: Metals and Stones]
Among the metals of the earth, gold; and precious stones like al-mas; and in its portion are red salt, al-madqashit'a which resembles gold, al-shadana, and every sparkling stone.

[The Sun: Places and Creatures]
Among the places on earth, palaces and royal houses are its portion. (7) Among living creatures, humans, horses, lions, and large wild sheep.

[The Sun: Birds and Creeping Animals]
Among the birds, al-'uqban, which is the vulture, and shudanig. (9) Among the creeping animals of the earth, the large and deadly ones.

[The Sun: Trees and Plants]
Among the trees are date palms, grapevines, olive trees, apple trees, mulberry trees, hab al-maluch which are seraides, sefargalim, and fig trees. (12) In its portion are the rose, alubia, and silk.

[The Sun: Aromatics and Mixtures]
Among the types of aromatics are spikenard, al-kermez, aulakh, and everything that is hot by nature and has a pungent taste. (14) In its portion is every noble mixture.

[The Sun: Human Nature and Crafts]
Among human natures are knowledge, understanding, glory, beauty, courage, the pursuit of high virtues, love of wealth, excessive speech, quickness in response, and much desire. (16) Among the crafts are goldsmiths and silversmiths, and the making of crowns.

[The Sun: Indications and Appearance]
It also indicates laws and statutes, joining the congregation, fathers, and middle brothers, and according to its strength, it will give of its nature. (18) If it rules alone over a person's form, he will be fat, his complexion white, his eyes medium-sized, his hair thin, and he will have a majestic appearance.

[The Sun: Body Parts and Humors]
Among the parts of the human body, the heart is its portion, the right eye by day, and by night the opposite, the brain, the arteries, and the entire right half of the body; it also indicates red bile.

[The Sun: Infirmities and Ages]
Among its infirmities, everything that occurs in the mouth. Youth.

[The Sun: Color, Taste, and Direction]
Its color is medium red and saffron yellow; its taste is pungent. (23) Among the directions, east.

[The Sun: Letters, Days, and Hours]
Among the letters of speech are Aleph, Dalet, and Lamed, and this shape: _~4. (25) Among the days, Sunday; among the nights, the night of Thursday; and among their hours, the first and the eighth.

[The Sun: Years and Body Power]
Its greatest years are one thousand four hundred sixty-one, the great years one hundred twenty, the middle years thirty-nine and a half, and the small years nineteen. (27) The years of al-fardar are ten. (28) And the power of its body is fifteen degrees, before it and after it.

[Venus: Nature and Influence]
Venus. Cold and moist, of good and temperate mixture, and it is a good, amending planet.

[Venus: Soul and Procreation]
In its portion are the appetitive soul and procreation.

[Venus: Climates and Nations]
Among the climates, the fifth climate is its portion, where Spain and part of the land of Edom are located. (4) Among the nations, Arabs, and everyone who follows the law of Ishmael.

[Venus: People and Underground Substances]
Among human beings are youths, eunuchs, women, comedians, musicians, and poets. (6) Among everything that is underground, earth is its portion, turmeric-colored copper, al-lazaward, al-magnesia, al-martakh, al-nushadar, al-gaz which is irment, and atinkar.

[Venus: Ornaments and Places]
And women's rings. And every ornament. (8) Among the places on earth, gardens, orchards, places of myrtles and flowers, places of women, feasting, and beds.

[Venus: Animals and Birds]
Among the animals are gazelles, deer, and every beautiful animal. (10) Among the birds, al-hayjil which is the partridge, and doves and sparrows.

[Venus: Creeping Animals and Trees]
Among the creeping animals of the earth are spiders, and ants, also frogs are in its portion. (12) Among the trees are apple trees, pomegranate trees, and every fruit that has a good smell and a pleasant taste.

[Venus: Aromatics and Clothing]
In its portion are balsam, and everything that has a good smell, and everything that is rich and oily. (14) Among the garments, every embroidered work, and every beautiful garment.

[Venus: Human Nature and Crafts]
Among human natures are cleanliness, love, mockery, laughter, joy, dancing, beautiful speech, love, fornication, gambling, generosity, much desire for everything, false swearing, love of drunkenness, much sexual intercourse which is natural, love of children, and love of markets; and in general: love of justice and houses of worship. (16) Among the crafts, every dyed thing and sewing.

[Venus: Indications and Appearance]
It indicates every food and drink, and the mother, and the daughters, and the younger sister; and according to its strength in the nativity, its nature will be seen in the person. (18) And if it rules alone in the nativity...

[Venus's Influence on Human Appearance]
If it [Venus] rules alone over a person's nativity, and it is oriental (of the Sun), he [the native] will be fat, with a pale complexion, a fine shape, and dark eyes, and he will be tall; but if it is occidental (of the Sun), he will be short, his face will not be pure white, his hair will not be curly, and he will be bald. (19) In general: it [Venus] signifies everyone who is good-looking with a round face and dark eyes, and a frequent smiler.

[Venus's Influence on Body Parts and Illnesses]
And in its portion of the human body are the flesh, the fat, the liver, and the human seed, and all moisture belongs to it. (21) And among its illnesses, everything that happens in the kidneys and the genitals. (22) And of its ages, youth; and in general: from when one passes thirteen years.

[Venus's Qualities and Associations]
And the appearance of its eyes is white, tending slightly to green. (24) And its taste is sweet and bland. (25) And of the directions, East. (26) And of the letters of speech, Tet and Dalet, and of the shapes 2 1245. (27) And of the days, the day of the third [Tuesday], and of the nights, the night of the third [Tuesday night], and of their hours, the first and the eighth. (28) Its greatest years are one thousand one hundred fifty-one, and the great ones eighty-two, and the middle ones forty-five, and the small ones eight. (29) And the years of the part called al-fardar are eight. (30) And the power of its body is seven degrees, before it and after it.

[Mercury's Nature and Influence]
Sun. It is mixed and changeable, for it changes according to the nature of the other planets and also according to the nature of the signs, and its nature inclines slightly to cold and dryness. (2) And in its portion is the soul of man, and the power of understanding. (3) And in its portion of the climes is the sixth clime. (4) And of the nations, Gog and Magog, and of the peoples, the people of SATIN.

[Mercury's Influence on Appearance]
If it [Mercury] rules alone over a person’s form, and it is oriental (of the Sun), he [the native] will be short, his head will be small, and his eyes beautiful; but if it is occidental (of the Sun), his complexion will be of intermediate color, (that is,) between dark and pale, and he will be thin, his eyes small, and dryness will predominate in him. (17) In general: it signifies a person with a protruding forehead, long nose, emaciated, with a scraggly beard, long fingers, a moral and learned person.

[Mercury's Body Parts and Illnesses]
Of the human body, the tongue is in its portion, and the mouth, the tendons, and it has a part of the blood. (19) The infirmities in its portion are mental diseases, such as obsessive thinking, melancholy, and every uncertainty.

[Mercury's Qualities and Associations]
Of the ages of man, childhood is in its portion. (21) Its color is azure, and any mixed color. (22) Its taste is sour. (23) Of the sides (of the horizon), north. (24) Of the letters, waw, tav, resh, and mem, and the matres lectionis aleph, heh, waw, and yod, and this shape ¥. (25) Of the days (of the week), the daytime of the fourth (day) [i.e., from sunrise to sundown on Wednesday], of the nights, the night of the first (day) [i.e., between sundown on Saturday and sunrise on Sunday]; of their hours, the first and eighth.

[Mercury's Years and Power]
Its greatest years are 480, the great (years) 76, the middle (years) 48, the least (years) 20. (27) The years of the period called al-fardar, 13. (28) The power of its body is seven degrees, ahead of or behind it.

[Moon's Nature and Influence]
The Moon. Cold and moist, and it has a little heat. It decomposes all bodies and causes them to decay; when it is opposite the Sun it ripens all fruits. (2) The power of nature is in its portion. (3) Of the climates, the seventh climate is in its portion, which is the far extremity of the ecumene. (4) Of the nations, al-Sabiah [i.e., the Sabaeans]. (5) Of human beings, sailors, travelers, messengers, and servants.

[Moon's Associations with Materials and Animals]
And its portion of the metals, silver, crystal, onyx, and lime. (7) And in its portion are the seas, and the rivers, and the ponds. (8) And of the animals, mules, and donkeys, and cattle, and the rabbit, and fish. (9) And of the birds, every white bird. (10) And of the creeping things, everything that is white.

[Moon's Associations with Plants and Scents]
And of the trees, willows, and peaches, and all kinds of greens, and squashes, and melons, and pumpkins. (12) And in its portion is al-garfa, which is cinnamon, dar pepper, and dar sini, and everything whose nature is cold and moist and whose taste is salty and whose appearance is white with a little green. (13) And in its portion of the types of perfume is al-s'adi. (14) And in its portion is leather for clothing and table coverings.

[Moon's Influence on Human Nature]
And in its portion of human nature, many thoughts, and soul-talk, and lack of knowledge, and much forgetfulness, and much fear, and purity of heart, and revealing secrets, and love of joy, and victory, and the knowledge of the bishop, and the knowledge of legends.

[Planetary Power: Single Good Fortune]
is in the house of its exaltation; and if it were in its term, it would have three auspices. (3) Single good fortune is when the planet is in its house and its nature is tempered there, as when Saturn is in Aquarius, Jupiter in Sagittarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Taurus, Mercury in Virgo, or the luminaries in their houses.

[Planetary Power: Moderate Good Fortune]
Moderate good fortune is when the planet is in its house but its nature is not tempered, as when Saturn is in Capricorn, Jupiter in Pisces, Mars in Aries, Venus in Libra, or Mercury in Gemini. 3 (1) The planet has power when it rises in the north!

[Planetary Power: Conditions for Strength]
Or when it ascends in the circle of apogee and perigee whose center is far from [i.e., not the same as] the center of the Earth. (3) Or when it is in the second station. (4) Or when it moves away from (being) under the ray of the Sun. (5) Or when it is in one of the cardines or in the (places) succedent to them [the cardines]. (6) Or when the three upper planets, namely, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, are oriental of the Sun; if they are in sextile with it [the Sun] this is auspicious for them. (7) Or when they are in one of the masculine quadrants and in the masculine signs, and this holds true for the Sun when it is in this condition unless it [the Sun] is in Libra. (8) The three lower planets, namely, Venus, Mercury and the Moon, have power when they are occidental of the Sun or in a feminine quadrant.

[Planetary Weakness: Conditions for Debility]
A planet is weak when its motion is slowing down. (2) Or when it is in the first station. (3) Or when it is retrograde; being retrograde is more inauspicious for the two lower planets, particularly if they are burnt by the Sun. (4) Or when the planet is under the ray of the Sun. (5) Or when it is in the dark degrees. (6) Or when it is in the opposite (condition) to its similitude. (7) Or (when it is) in the house of its dejection. (8) Or when it descends in the south or (when it is) southern. (9) Or (when it is) in one of the cadent places. (10) Or (when it is) in the path of burning, which is from Libra 19° to Scorpio 3°. (11) Or (when it is) in the house of its detriment. (12) Or when it applies to a retrograde planet or to one that is in the house of its dejection or in a cadent place. (13) Or when the planet is not received {by another planet). (14) Or when it is a stranger in its position, and this is more inauspicious if it is not aspected by a planet. (15) Or when the three upper planets are occidental of the Sun, or in one of the feminine quadrants, or in the feminine signs. (16) The same holds true for the Sun, unless it is in the ninth place, because that is the place of its joy. (17) The lower planets are weak when they begin to be oriental of the Sun, or when they are in one of the masculine quadrants.

[Planetary Malefic Aspects]
And the evil of the planet is when it is in conjunction with malefic planets, or when it is aspected by them in a square, trine, or sextile. (2) Or between it and the sign.

[Malefic Aspects and Lunar Nodes]
from the bounds of a planet. (3) Or that it is in the bounds of a malefic, or in its house. (4) Or that one of the malefics is elevated above it, being in the tenth or eleventh house opposite the place of the planet. (5) And it is worse if the malefic is not receiving, and if the malefics are in conjunction with the Sun, or in a square aspect, or opposite; (6) Or if the planet is with its own North Node or South Node; (7) Or with the Moon's North Node or South Node, and there is less than twelve degrees between them. (8) And the great difficulty is for the Moon when it is like this, and the difficulty for the Sun when the distance is four degrees before or after it. 6 (1) And the ancients said that the nature of the North Node is to add, and the nature of the South Node is to subtract. Behold, if the benefic planets were with the North Node, it would add to their beneficence, and if malefic, it would add to their malice; if the benefics were with the South Node, their beneficence would diminish, and if the malefics were with it, their malice would diminish. (2) Regarding this, a wise man said that the North Node is good for benefics and bad for malefics, and the South Node is bad for benefics and good for malefics. 7 (1) And a planet's debility is when the planet is midway between two malefics, in conjunction or aspect, as I will explain further.

[Moon's Malefic Conditions]
8 (1) And the Moon's malice is in eleven ways. (2) The first, that it is darkened. (3) And the second, that it is under the light of the Sun, and between them is less than twelve degrees.

[Conditions of the Planets]
From the Sun, after the opposition of 135 degrees, three-quarters of its body remains illuminated. From there, until its distance from the opposition is 90 degrees, half of its body is illuminated. From there, until it is 45 degrees from the Sun, one-quarter of its light remains. From there, until it is 12 degrees away, it enters under the rays. From 6 degrees, it is under combustion. Know that when you subtract these degrees, sometimes it is under the ray and sometimes under combustion. Then 12 conditions remain, and these are called the lunar keys. They are very important for knowing about rain. Chapter Seven. On the conditions of the planets, which are thirty: approach, conjunction, mixture, aspect, separation, solitary motion, desolation, translation, clustering, reflecting the light, giving power, giving lordship, giving nature, giving two natures, advance, distortion, prohibition, returning with amelioration, returning with corruption, cancellation, accident, loss, cutting the light, pleasantness, recompense, reception, generosity, similitude, intermediacy, and domination. "Approach" is when two planets are in the same sign, direct in their motions, and the degrees of the swifter planet in the sign are less than the degrees of the slower planet. As long as its degrees are less, it is said to be "approaching"; when it is with it in the same minute, its approach is completed. Approach begins when the distance between them is less than 15 degrees, and the fewer degrees between them, the stronger they are in everything they signify. The same holds true for approach in the rays of light, which are the seven aspects mentioned previously. "Conjunction": When two planets are in the same sign, each of them within the power of the other's body, they are said to be in conjunction. When they are in the same minute, their power is complete in everything they signify. If one of them is within the power of the other's body, but the latter is not within the power of the former's body, all their indications will not be full unless each of them is close by, only an approach to its half. And a similar case is when the distance between the Moon and Saturn is eight degrees, forward or backward, and behold, each of them is in the power of the other's body; and if there are ten degrees between them, Saturn will be in the power of the Moon's body, but the Moon is not in the power of Saturn's body. And whenever the swift planet moves towards the conjunction of the heavy one, it has more power from the moment it separates from it, even if it is in the power of its body. And if the two planets were in two signs, and each of them in the power of the other's body, they would not be said to be in conjunction because they are in different signs. This is the opinion of the ancients, and I, Abraham, the translator of the book, disagree with them, as I will explain in the book of Nativities. Also, the ancients did not mention for the superior planets that are in the zodiacal circle the measure of the power of their bodies, only Doronius alone said that it is a quarter of a sign. And the opinion of the diligent in this wisdom is that the measure of the body of the servant, whether the superior planet is from the first or second dignity. And the meaning of conjunction: the conjunction of two or more planets, each one's sphere lower than its companion's sphere, and both will be opposite one degree and one minute opposite the zodiacal circle. Then the swift one will hide the heavy one from the sight of the eye, for it is under it. And this will be if there is no space between them, calculated by the ephemeris, and I will speak further on this. "Mixture." When a planet conjoins another planet, and they are among the servants, then another nature will be born from both of their natures. Like Saturn and Mars, each of which is a malefic, and when they conjoin, the ancients said it indicates good. And the truth is that one will nullify the action of its companion, and the native will be saved from harm, and behold, they will not indicate good, but only the good that they are not harmful. And Jupiter with Saturn is the great conjunction because both are superior, and in the power of whichever of them it is, its nature will be seen. And Mars with Venus, their conjunction is mixed, as I will explain. And the conjunction of the servants with the Sun harms them, and the hardest of all is on Venus, the Moon, Saturn, and Mars, also they harm the Sun when they conjoin with it. And Jupiter and Venus will do good and not evil. And Mercury, because of its many movements and its proximity to the Sun, will always be slightly. To always be carried to the degrees that are equal in their movements. And the example is that one planet is at ten degrees of Aries and the second at twenty degrees of Pisces, and behold, the distance of both from the line of the equator is equal, and behold, they are considered as if they are in conjunction. And another way, as if they are in one degree whose distorted hours are equal, as in sixteen degrees of Aries with fourteen of Taurus; and the reason for this is because their distance from the head of Cancer is equal, and similarly if their distance from the head of Capricorn was equal. And that their distance from the head of Aries or from Libra. And Mars is harmful, and if the conjunction is with Saturn. Or in one of the aspects, less than six degrees from it, it is also in its mixture. Another. Degrees. It happens. The planet. Is transferred. And that heavy one with a heavier one than it. To. The one. Will return. The light. Lord. "Giving power" is when a planet is in its house, or in the house of its exaltation, or in the house of its triplicity, or in its term, or in its decan, and conjoins or aspects another planet—in which case it gives its own power to it. "Giving lordship" is when one planet aspects another planet, in an aspect of total love or of half love—in which case the mixture of both is tempered. "Giving nature" is when a planet applies to the lord of the sign in which it is, or the lord of the house of its exaltation, or the lord of its term, or the lord of its triplicity, or the lord of its decan—in which case it gives its nature to the other planet. "Giving two natures" has two types. The first is when a planet is in a sign in which it has a dignity and conjoins or aspects another planet that has a dignity in this sign, such as when Venus is with Jupiter in Pisces. The second type is when a planet applies to another planet of the same nature, such as diurnal planets with diurnal planets and nocturnal planets with nocturnal planets. "Advance" means that a planet is in its highest rank, and this is when it is in one of the cardines or a succedent place. "Distortion" is when a planet is in one of the cadent places. "Prohibition" has two types. The first is when three planets are in the same sign, but in different degrees, and the heavy one has the most degrees; then the middle one prevents the light one, which has the fewest degrees, from application to the heavy one, until it passes it. For example, if Saturn is at Aries 20 degrees, Mercury is at 15 degrees there, and Venus is at Aries 11 degrees, Mercury prevents Venus from application to Saturn until it passes it; after that Venus applies to it. The second type is by aspect, when two planets are in the same sign and the swift one is applying to the heavy one, and another planet aspects that heavy planet, whatever aspect it may be; and behold, the planet that is with it in the sign prevents the aspecting planet and corrupts it, provided that their degrees are equal. Only if the degrees of the aspecting planet are closer to the aspect, the applying planet cannot prevent the aspecting planet.

[Returning to Good Fortune]
Returning to good fortune. Know that returning is when a planet conjoins or aspects another planet that is under the Sun's light; and behold, the planet cannot receive the light due to its weakness, and thus it returns it. And another way is when a planet conjoins a retrograde planet, and behold, it returns what it received. And returning to good fortune occurs in three ways. The first is when the one holding the power that returns to it receives the giver. The second is when the light planet is direct in its motion and the heavy one is combust, or under the light, or retrograde. The third is when the returning planet is in one of the cadent houses, and the planet to which the light is returned is in one of the cardines or succedent houses.

[Returning to Misfortune]
Returning to misfortune: the opposite of the three aforementioned ways.

[Cancellation]
Cancellation: when a planet is in the power of another body, but before it becomes one, it turns retrograde.

[Accident]
Accident: when three planets are in one sign, one is light and has many degrees, the second is heavier than it and has few degrees, and the third is lighter than the first and applies to the heavy one; and the first light planet, which has many degrees, turns retrograde and conjoins the heavy one.

[Loss]
Loss: when a planet is going to conjoin another planet in the same sign, and before it conjoins it, the heavy one moves out of the sign and another planet conjoins it there.

[Cutting the Light]
Cutting the light occurs in three ways. The first is when a light planet applies to a heavier one, and both are in the same sign, and there is a third light planet in the next sign; and before the first light planet conjoins the heavy one, the planet that is in the next sign turns retrograde and enters the sign where the heavy one is and conjoins it; and behold, it cuts its light from the first planet. The second way is when a light planet applies to a planet heavier than it, and both are in the same sign, and that heavy one also applies to another planet heavier than it; and before the first reaches the second, the second conjoins the third and passes it; and behold, it cuts the light from the first. The third way is when a planet conjoins another planet for which there is no need.

[Pleasure]
Pleasure: when a planet is in its fall or detriment and another planet conjoins it, or it conjoins another planet, and that planet is its friend, or its ruler, or has some dominion in that sign; and behold, it will lift it from its fall or detriment and make it pleasant.

[Recompense]
Recompense: that planet which lifted the first from its fall or detriment, when the planet that lifted it aspects, and that lifter falls into its fall or detriment, that planet will lift it.

[Reception]
Reception: when a planet conjoins, whether by conjunction or aspect, a planet that is its domicile ruler, or its exaltation ruler, or its triplicity ruler, or its term ruler, or its face ruler; and behold, that planet will receive it. Or when a planet conjoins another planet, and the second planet is in the house of the giver of power or in its house of exaltation, this is also reception; but if it is in its house of triplicity, or its term, or its face, it will not receive it completely. Only if two dignities combine, triplicity with term or with face, and a trine or sextile aspect; this is also reception. Also if they are in the degrees of the signs that are in their motions. And a benefic planet will receive good because its nature is upright, and Mars and Saturn will receive each other if they are in conjunction or in a sextile or trine aspect, but not in other aspects.

[Strong, Medium, and Weak Reception]
And there is reception that is strong, medium, and weak. Strong reception will always be for the Moon from the Sun, for it receives it from all signs because its light is from it, but it will be with effort and sorrow, and if it is in a sign where it has some dominion, then there will be two receptions. And like Mercury, when the planet receives from the sign of Virgo, because it is its domicile and exaltation, then it will be complete reception. And domicile reception is medium. And triplicity, term, or face reception is weak.

[Moon's Significance]
The Moon is close to the Earth and swift in its motion; it is more mixed with the planets, for it gives power to them, and no planet gives its power to it; it transfers light from planet to planet; it resembles the native, for its light grows until it is full and then gradually diminishes until it is invisible and departs from the world. Therefore, all the ancients said that it signifies every matter, every thought, and the beginning of every action. If it is in its strength and in good conditions, everything a person begins to do at that time will succeed; and the opposite is true if it is with malefics. They said that you should look for the querent at the ascendant sign and its ruler, and for the matter he asks about, at the seventh sign and its ruler, and always make the Moon its partner. If the Moon moves alone, it indicates that everything the querent asks is insubstantial and impossible. When a planet approaches conjunction or aspect with the Moon, it signifies all future events and what the querent hopes for – good if the planet is benefic, bad if it is malefic. Separation from the Moon indicates past events. If it separated from conjunction or aspect with a benefic planet, they were good; and if with a malefic planet, they were bad. If the planet to which the Moon gives its power is in its strength, then the matter will be done properly, and the opposite is true if it was weak. And so it is for any planet that gives its power to another planet; the matter will be done according to the power of the receiver. On a day when the Moon is with malefics, everything the querent asks about will not be done completely and properly if the planet is in the ascendant sign. If the Moon is in one of the cardines, it is worse, for it signifies fear in the soul and illness in the body; if it is in the cadent houses, it signifies fear but not illness.

[Benefic and Malefic Planets]
Planets are of two kinds, benefic and malefic. In every place you find a benefic planet, say good, and the opposite is true. Benefic planets are upright and beneficial, whether they receive or not, and if they receive, it is better; and malefics destroy by their nature, and if the planet is received by it, its evil will be lessened, and so too if its aspect to it is trine or sextile. And a planet is not called harmed until the ray of the malefic is within the power of its body; and if it is less than that, it indicates only slight harm. And after it separates from its aspect, even one degree, and especially if there are more degrees, it will cause fear that will not come to fruition. And in this way, the benefic planet and the planet that indicates what will be: if it does not aspect the ascendant sign, the querent's hope will not come to light.

[Benefics and Malefics]
Benefic planets, if they aspect malefics, will diminish their evil.

[Benefics and Malefics]
Benefics will always indicate good, and malefics evil; but if the malefic is in great strength, it will indicate good, but it will come with effort and sorrow.

[Weak Benefics]
If the benefics are in opposition to their nature, or in their fall, or in their detriment, or in cadent houses where there is no aspect between them and the ascendant sign, they will not be beneficial at all.

[Weak Malefics]
Also, malefics, if they are like this, will do little harm.

[Strong Benefic]
If the benefic is in its strength and is isolated in the dominion of the native, its good will increase.

[Jupiter and Venus with Malefics]
If Jupiter aspects a malefic, it will change its nature for good. Venus cannot change the nature of Saturn except with the help of Jupiter. Jupiter removes the harm of Saturn, and Venus removes the harm of Mars more than Jupiter.

[Benefics and Malefics in Bad Positions]
If benefics and malefics are in a bad place or combust, they indicate a contemptible matter and will do neither good nor bad due to their weakness.

[Strong Malefic vs. Weak Benefic]
If a malefic is oriental to the Sun, in a sign where it has rulership, and no other malefic aspects it, it is better than a benefic that is combust or retrograde.

[Malefic Lords of Query]
If the lords of the requested matter are malefics, and the lord of the ascendant applies to them, and the Moon is in a quartile or opposition aspect, then if the requested matter occurs, its outcome will be bad.

[Malefic in Ascendant]
If a malefic is in the ascendant sign and has some rulership there, its harm is lessened. But if it is retrograde, it will add evil upon evil.

[Malefic Aspecting Benefic]
If a malefic aspects a benefic with a quartile or opposition aspect, it will diminish its good.

[Malefic in Dignity and Angle]
If a malefic is in a place of its rulership and is in one of the angles or succedent houses, its power is considered like that of benefics.

[Malefic as a Stranger]
If a malefic is a stranger in its place, its harm will increase.

[Malefic in Angles and Aspects]
If a malefic is in one of the angles, or harms a planet with a quartile or opposition aspect, its harm will be complete, especially if it is stronger than the planet. But with a trine or sextile aspect, its harm is lessened.

[Malefic as Lord of Query]
If a malefic is the lord of the requested matter, it indicates a delay in the matter, and it will only come with sadness and worry.

[Malefic and Benefic Interactions]
If a malefic gives to a malefic, it will add evil upon evil. If a benefic gives to a benefic, it will add good upon good. If a malefic gives to a benefic, the matter will turn from bad to good. And if a benefic gives to a malefic, it will turn from good to bad.

[Planet in House or Exaltation]
Every planet, whether benefic or malefic, if it is in its own house or house of exaltation, always indicates good.

[Planet at Cusp and Power]
Any planet at the beginning of a sign is considered weak until it is four degrees past it. Likewise, if a planet is less than five degrees from one of the houses, it is considered within the power of the house; but if it is more, it falls outside the power of the house.

[Planet in First 15 Degrees]
Any planet that is in the beginning of a house up to fifteen degrees has great power.

[Planet at Malefic Angle]
If a planet is at one of the angles of a malefic and separates from its aspect by one degree, it will cause fear but will not come to fruition.

[Planet in House of Dejection]
If a planet is in the house of its dejection, it indicates worry, siege, and distress.

[Retrograde Planet]
A retrograde planet indicates rebellion and the destruction of everything that is planned.

[Planet in Station]
A planet in its first station is like a person who does not know what to do and whose end is bad. If in its second station, it is like a person who hopes for something and whose hope will not be lost.

[Planet Slowing Down]
If a planet is slowing down in its motion, the matter, whether good or bad, will be delayed. But if Jupiter and Saturn are in the tropical signs, they will hasten the matter.

[Planet at End of Sign]
If a planet is at the end of a sign, its power from the first sign is lost, and all its power is in the sign it is entering. If the planet is in the twenty-ninth degree of the sign, its power is still in the sign it is in, because a planet has power in three degrees: in the degree it is in, one degree before it, and one degree after it.

[Planet Pursuing Another]
If a planet is going to conjoin a second, but before they unite, the second enters another sign, and the first planet pursues it and overtakes it there, but does not conjoin it before another planet overtakes it, the requested matter will be fulfilled only after despair.

[Aspect Before Conjunction]
If a planet aspects a second planet that moved from its place before a lighter planet reached it, it will not harm it, because the aspect will not cancel the conjunction of the bodies.

[Planet in Sign of its Nature]
If a planet is in a sign that is of its nature, its power will increase. But if it is opposite to its nature, it will be weakened, like Saturn in a cold and dry sign.

[Received Planet]
A received planet, if it is a benefic, will increase its good. If it is a malefic, its harm will be lessened.

[Planet in 6th or 12th House]
A planet is not good if it is not in one of its places of rulership and is in the sixth or twelfth house.

[Planet Under Sun's Rays]
A planet, if it is under the Sun's rays and is one of the superior planets, has no power. The same applies to the inferior planets, and if they are retrograde, there is nothing worse.

[Retrograde Planet Becoming Direct]
If the planet indicating the matter is retrograde and then becomes direct in its motion, it indicates that only part of the matter will occur. The same applies if it was under the Sun's rays and moves out from under its rays.

[Planet in Pits]
If a planet is in one of the pits, if it is a benefic planet, its good will be diminished. If it is a malefic, its harm will be increased.

[Planet in 8th House]
If a benefic planet is in the eighth house, it indicates neither good nor bad. If it is a malefic, it indicates complete evil.

[Planet Standing Still]
If a planet is about to turn retrograde, it indicates a lack of the desired outcome, difficulty, and loss. If it is about to turn direct, it indicates the goodness of the matter, its strength, and its rectitude.

[12th House of Planet]
If the twelfth house of a planet is in a good place, there is no good in it.

[Planet in Fixed, Mutable, or Common Signs]
If a planet is in a fixed sign, it indicates that everything will stand firm and endure. If it is in a mutable sign, the matter will change. If it is in a common sign, it indicates that part of the matter will endure or the matter will change twice.

[Receiving Planet in Bad Place]
If the planet receiving power is in a bad place, it indicates evil.

[Lord of Ascendant in Detriment]
If the lord of the ascendant is in the house of its detriment, it has no complete desire for the matter being asked about.

[Planet Conjoining Benefics and Malefics]
If a planet conjoins both benefics and malefics, it will show the nature of the stronger among them.

[Lord of Ascendant and Query]
If the lord of the ascendant gives power to the lord of the requested house, the matter will be sought with all desire. And if the lord of the requested matter gives power to the lord of the ascendant, the matter will occur without effort.

[Intervening Planet]
If there is a planet preventing their connection, it indicates a person who will separate him from the requested matter.

[Lord of Ascendant Separating]
If the lord of the ascendant separates from the lord of the requested matter, his desire will cease.

[No Planet Aspecting Moon]
If no planet aspects the Moon, it indicates...

[Many planets aspecting the Moon]
If many planets aspect the Moon, there will be many helpers to fulfill the matter.

[Planet transferring light to requested matter]
If a planet transfers light from the lord of the ascendant to the lord of the requested matter, the matter will be achieved through an intermediary.

[Lord of ascendant in triplicity]
If the lord of the ascendant is in its triplicity house and the lords of the triplicity signs aspect it, its relatives will help it.

[Planet returning light]
If the planet is in the manner we mentioned concerning the return of light, the matter will be after despair.

[Planet giving power]
If the significator is in a position of giving power, it signifies that the matter will be completed as desired.

[Planet giving rulership]
If the significator is in a position of giving rulership, it signifies that the matter will reveal itself to another.

[Significator in position of birth]
The testimony of the significator, if it is in a position of birth, signifies great joy in the matter.

[Significator in position of two births]
The testimony of the significator, if it is in a position of two births, signifies the joy of the querent and the one from whom the matter is sought.

[Significator in direct motion]
The testimony of the significator, if it is in direct motion, signifies good fortune for anything sought.

[Significator in retrograde motion]
The testimony of the significator, if it is in retrograde motion, signifies that the matter will be abandoned.

[Planets in trine aspect]
Planets in trine are like two people of the same nature.

[Planets in quartile aspect]
Planets in quartile are like a person seeking rulership.

[Planets in opposition aspect]
Planets in opposition are like two people fighting each other.

[Planet in the first house]
A planet in the first house is like a person emerging from his mother's womb, or something that comes at its proper time.

[Planet in the second house]
A planet in the second house is like a person in the house of his helpers.

[Planet in the third house]
A planet in the third house is like a person visiting his brother.

[Planet in the fourth house]
A planet in the fourth house is like a person in his ancestral home or on his land.

[Planet in the fifth house]
A planet in the fifth house is like a person with his merchandise and his joy.

[Planet in the sixth house]
A planet in the sixth house is like a weak person fleeing.

[Planet in the seventh house]
A planet in the seventh house is like a person seeking to wage war.

[Planet in the eighth house]
A planet in the eighth house is like a person in terror and fear.

[Planet in the ninth house]
A planet in the ninth house is like a person removed from his home or his rulership.

[Planet in the tenth house]
A planet in the tenth house is like a person in his rulership and his craft.

[Planet in the eleventh house]
A planet in the eleventh house is like a person in the house of his friends.

[Planet in the twelfth house]
A planet in the twelfth house is like a person in the house of prohibitions.

[Chapter Nine: Lots of Planets and Houses]
Chapter Nine: On the Lots of the Planets and the Houses, and there are seventy-nine lots.

[Lot of Fortune calculation]
The Lot of the Moon: Subtract the Sun's position in its sign in direct degrees from the Moon's position in its sign, and add the remainder between them to the ascendant degree. The place where the lot falls is called the Lot of Fortune.

[Lot of Fortune by day and night]
Do this if the native was born by day. But if at night, subtract the Moon's position from the Sun's position, and add the remainder to the ascendant degree, and there is the Lot of Fortune.

[Ptolemy's view on Lot of Fortune]
This is the opinion of the Ancients, but Ptolemy disagrees with them, for he says that we should always subtract the Sun's position from the Moon's position, whether by day or by night.

[Lot of Fortune as Moon's ascendant]
He is right, for the ratio of the ascendant sign to the Sun is like the ratio of the Lot of Fortune to the Moon; therefore, it is called the Moon's ascendant.

[Masha'allah on Lot of the Absent]
And a wise man from India, whose name was Masha'allah, said in his Book of Experiments that the Lot of the Absent at night is stronger than the Lot of Fortune; and behold, he returned to Ptolemy's opinion without realizing it.

[Significations of Lot of Fortune]
This Lot of Fortune signifies the body, life, wealth, success, good reputation, the beginning of all actions, and what is in a person's thoughts.

[Lot of the Sun (Lot of the Absent)]
The Lot of the Sun: Subtract the Moon's position from the Sun's position and add the remainder to the ascendant degree, then you will find the place of the lot, and this is called the Lot of the Absent.

[Lot of the Sun for night birth]
And if the native was born at night, subtract the Sun's position from the Moon's position and add the remainder to the ascendant degree, then you will find the lot.

[Ptolemy's view on Lot of the Sun]
This is the opinion of the Ancients, but Ptolemy says that by day or by night it is the same, and this is the truth.

[Significations of Lot of the Sun]
This lot signifies the soul, divine worship, and everything hidden and concealed.

[Lot of Saturn calculation]
The Lot of Saturn: Take the distance between Saturn's position and the degree of the Lot of Fortune and add it to the ascendant degree, and there is the lot if the native was born by day. And if at night, the matter is reversed.

[Significations of Lot of Saturn]
This lot signifies depth of thought, agriculture, loss, theft, poverty, imprisonment, and captivity.

[Lot of Jupiter calculation]
The Lot of Jupiter: For a day birth, take the distance between the Lot of the Absent and Jupiter and add it to the ascendant; the lot is there. For a night birth, do the opposite.

[Significations of Lot of Jupiter]
This lot signifies truth, kindness, wisdom, honor, good reputation, and wealth.

[Lot of Mars calculation]
The Lot of Mars: For a day birth, take the distance between the planet and the Lot of Fortune and add it to the ascendant, and for a night birth, do the opposite; and there is the lot.

[Significations of Lot of Mars]
This lot signifies bravery, anger, speed, cunning, and desire.

[Lot of Venus calculation]
The Lot of Venus: For a day birth, take the distance between the Lot of Fortune and the Lot of the Absent, and for a night birth, do the opposite, and add it to the ascendant, and there is the lot.

[Significations of Lot of Venus]
This lot signifies love, joy, pleasure, food, drink, desire, and sexual intercourse.

[Lot of Mercury calculation]
The Lot of Mercury: For a day birth, take the distance between the Lot of the Absent and the Lot of Fortune, and for a night birth, do the opposite, and add it to the ascendant.

[Significations of Lot of Mercury]
This lot signifies poverty, enmity, envy, trade, mathematics, literature, and wisdom.

[Lots of the Houses]
These are the lots of the houses.

[First House Lots]
The first house has three lots.

[Lot of Life calculation]
The first is the Lot of Life, which is taken for a day birth from the distance of Jupiter from Saturn, and for a night birth, the opposite, and this distance is cast from the ascendant.

[Lot of Support and Splendor]
And the second lot is the Lot of Support and Splendor, which is taken for a day birth from the Lot of Fortune to the Lot of the Absent, and for a night birth, the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant; and this lot is like the Lot of Venus.

[Lot of Knowledge and Speech]
And the third lot is the Lot of Knowledge and Speech, which is taken for a day birth from the Sun to Mars, and for a night birth, the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Second House]
The second house has three lots. (2) The first is the Lot of Wealth, which is taken by day and by night from the lord of the second house to the cusp of the second house, corrected according to the latitude of the region, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of Loans, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to Mercury, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of Found Objects, which is taken by day from Mercury to Venus, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Third House]
The third house has three lots. (2) The first is the Lot of Brothers, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to Jupiter, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of the Number of Brothers, which is taken by day and by night from Mercury to Saturn, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of the Death of Brothers, which is taken by day from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven line, corrected according to the latitude of the region, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Fourth House]
The fourth house has seven lots. (2) The first is the Lot of the Father, which is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant; and if Saturn was under the Sun's rays, it is taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of the Death of the Father, which is taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of the Paternal Grandfather, which is taken by day from the lord of the Sun's house to Saturn, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (5) And if the Sun was in its own house or in one of Saturn's houses, it is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant; and do not be concerned if it was under the Sun's rays. (6) The fourth is the Lot of Lineage, which is taken by day from Saturn to Mars, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (7) The fifth is the Lot of Land, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is cast from the ascendant. (8) The sixth is the Lot of Agriculture, which is taken by day and by night from Venus to Saturn, and it is cast from the ascendant. (9) The seventh is the Lot of the Outcome, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to the lord of the house of the luminaries' conjunction if the native was born in the first half of the month, and to the lord of the house of the opposition if born in the latter half, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Fifth House]
The fifth house has five lots. (2) The first is the Lot of the Child, which is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of the Time a Child will be Born, whether male or female, which is taken by day and by night from Mars to Saturn, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of Male Children, which is taken by day and by night from the Moon to Jupiter, and it is cast from the ascendant. (5) The fourth is the Lot of Daughters, which is taken by day and by night from the Moon to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant. (6) The fifth is the Lot of the Query, whether male or female, which is taken by day from the lord of the Sun's house to the Moon, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Sixth House]
The sixth house has three lots. (2) The first is the Lot of Illnesses and Deformities, which is taken by day from Saturn to Mars, and by night the opposite, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of Servants, which is taken by day and by night from Mercury to the Moon, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of Imprisonment and Captivity, which is taken by day from the lord of the Sun's house to the Sun, and by night from the lord of the Moon's house to the Moon, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lots of the Seventh House]
The seventh house has thirteen lots. (2) The first is the Lot of Marriage for males and females, which is taken by day and by night from Venus to the Descendant degree, and it is cast from the ascendant. (3) The second is the Lot of Marriage in the Nativity of Males according to Enoch, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant; and in the opinion of Valens, it is taken by day and by night from the Sun to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant. (4) The third is the Lot of the Time of Marriage, which is taken by day and by night from the Sun to the Moon, and it is cast from the ascendant. (5) The fourth is the Lot of the Cunning of Marriage, which is taken by day and by night from the Sun to the Moon, and it is cast from the degree of Venus, and there is the lot. (6) The fifth is the Lot of a Woman's Chastity, which is taken by day and by night from the Moon to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant. (7) The sixth is the Lot of Women's Promiscuity, which is taken by day and by night from Venus to Saturn, and it is cast from the ascendant. (8) The seventh is the Lot of Men's Cunning, which is taken by day and by night from the Sun to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant. (9) The eighth is the Lot of Women's Cunning, which is taken by day and by night from the Moon to Mars, and it is cast from the ascendant. (10) The ninth is the Lot of Men's Promiscuity, which is taken by day and by night from the Sun to Venus, and it is cast from the ascendant.

[Lot of Intercourse]
(11) The tenth is the Lot of Intercourse, taken day and night from the Moon to Mars, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Erotic Desire]
(12) The eleventh is the Lot of Erotic Desire, taken day and night from the Moon to Mars, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Quarrels]
(13) The twelfth is the Lot of Quarrels, taken day and night from Mars to Jupiter, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Sons-in-Law]
(14) The thirteenth is the Lot of Sons-in-Law, taken day and night from Saturn to Venus, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Eighth House Lots]
(1) The eighth house has five lots.

[Lot of Death]
(2) The first is the Lot of Death, taken day and night from the degree of the Moon to the beginning of the eighth house, corrected for the latitude of the land, and cast from the place of Saturn; and there is the lot.

[Lot of the Killer Planet]
(3) The second is the Lot of the Killer Planet, taken by day from the lord of the Ascendant degree to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of the Year of Danger]
(4) The third is the Lot of the Year of Danger, taken day and night from Saturn to the lord of the house of the luminaries' conjunction, if the native was born in the first half of the month, or to the lord of the house of the opposition if the native was born in the second half of the month, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of the Place of Illness]
(5) The fourth is the Lot of the Place of Illness, taken by day from Saturn to Mars, and by night the reverse, and cast from the place of Mercury; and there is the lot.

[Lot of Distress]
(6) The fifth is the Lot of Distress, taken by day from Saturn to Mercury, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Ninth House Lots]
(1) The ninth house has seven lots.

[Lot of Travel by Land]
(2) The first is the Lot of Travel, taken day and night from the lord of the ninth house to the beginning of the ninth house, corrected for the latitude of the land, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Travel by Water]
(3) The second is the Lot of Travel by Water, taken by day from Saturn to fifteen degrees of Cancer, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant; and if Saturn is in the aforementioned degree, the lot will be in the Ascendant.

[Lot of Humility]
(4) The third is the Lot of Humility, taken by day from the Moon to Mercury, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Wisdom]
(5) The fourth is the Lot of Wisdom, taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the place of Mercury; and there is the lot.

[Lot of Knowledge]
(6) The fifth is the Lot of Knowledge, taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Tales]
(7) The sixth is the Lot of Tales, taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Truth or Falsehood]
(8) The seventh is the Lot of whether a matter is true or false, taken day and night from Mercury to the Moon, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Tenth House Lots]
(1) The tenth house has eleven lots.

[Lot of Kingship]
(2) The first is the Lot of Kingship, taken by day from Mars to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Victory]
(3) The second is the Lot of Victory, taken by day from the Sun to Saturn, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant; and if Saturn is under the Sun's rays, it is taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Counsel]
(4) The third is the Lot of Counsel, taken by day from Mercury to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Generosity]
(5) The fourth is the Lot of Generosity, taken day and night from Mercury to the Sun, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Sudden Rule]
(6) The fifth is the Lot of Sudden Rule, taken by day from Saturn to the Lot of Fortune, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Action]
(7) The sixth is the Lot of Action, taken day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of the Work of the Hand]
(8) The seventh is the Lot of the Work of the Hand, taken by day from Mercury to Venus, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Future Action]
(9) The eighth is the Lot of the Action that is to be done, taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Merchandise]
(10) The ninth is the Lot of Merchandise, taken by day from the Lot of the Absent to the Lot of Fortune, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of High Rank]
(11) The tenth is the Lot of High Rank, taken by day from the Sun to its degree of exaltation, and by night from the Moon to its degree of exaltation; and if the Sun by day is in its degree of exaltation, or the Moon by night is in its degree of exaltation, the lot will be in the degree of the Ascendant.

[Lot of the Mother]
(12) The eleventh is the Lot of the Mother, taken by day from Venus to the Moon, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Eleventh House Lots]
(1) The eleventh house has ten lots.

[Lot of Being Loved]
(2) The first is the Lot of Being Loved, taken by day from the Lot of Fortune to the Lot of the Absent, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Public Recognition]
(3) The second is the Lot of What is Known Among People, taken by day from the Lot of Fortune to the Sun, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Success]
(4) The third is the Lot of Success, taken by day from the Lot of Fortune to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Hope]
(5) The fourth is the Lot of Hope, taken by day from Saturn to Venus, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Home Well-being]
(6) The fifth is the Lot of Abundant Well-being in the Home, taken day and night from the Moon to Mercury, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Freedom of Spirit]
(7) The sixth is the Lot of Freedom of Spirit, taken by day from Mercury to Jupiter, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Praise]
(8) The seventh is the Lot of Praise, taken by day from Jupiter to Venus, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Desire]
(9) The eighth is the Lot of Desire, taken by day from the Lot of Fortune to the Lot of the Absent, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Changes]
(10) The ninth is the Lot of Changes, taken day and night from the Lot of Action to Mercury, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Friends]
(11) The tenth is the Lot of Friends, taken day and night from Mercury to the Moon, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Twelfth House Lots]
(1) The twelfth house has two lots.

[Lot of Enemies]
(2) The first is the Lot of Enemies, taken day and night from the lord of the twelfth house to the beginning of the twelfth house, corrected for the latitude of the land, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Enemies (Enoch)]
(3) The second lot, according to Enoch, is taken by day from Saturn to Mars, and by night the reverse, and cast from the Ascendant.

[Total Number of Lots]
(4) And behold, the total number of lots in the wisdom of the stars is seventy-one.

[Essential Lots]
(1) And the lots that are essential are nine.

[Lot of Years of Life]
(2) The first is the Lot of the Number of Years of Life. If the native was born in the first half of the month, take the distance from the degree of the luminaries' conjunction to the Moon at the time of birth and cast it from the Ascendant; and if born in the second half, take the distance from the degree of the luminaries' opposition to the Moon and cast it from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Physical Deformity]
The second is the lot of physical deformity, which is taken by day from the Lot of Fortune to Mars, and by night the opposite; and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot of Delay]
The third is the lot of delay, which is taken by day and by night from the degree of Mars to the cusp of the third house, corrected for the latitude of the land, and it is cast out from the ascendant. And Enoch said that it should be taken from the Lot of Love to Mercury and cast out from the place of Mercury, and there is the lot.

[Lot of Deceit]
The fourth is the lot of deceit, which is taken by day from Mercury to the Lot of the Absent, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot of the Sought Place]
The fifth is the lot of the sought place, which is taken by day and by night from Saturn to Mars, and it is cast out from the place of Mercury.

[Lot of Reward]
The sixth is the lot of reward, which is taken by day from Mars to the Sun, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot of Truth]
The seventh is the lot of truth, which is taken by day from Mercury to Mars, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot of Courage]
The eighth is the lot of courage, which is taken by day from Saturn to the Moon, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot of Killing]
The ninth is the lot of killing, which is taken by day from the lord of the ascendant to the Moon, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lots for Kings and Conjunctions]
These lots are needed for the revolution of the year of the great conjunction to know the affairs of kings and how long they will reign.

[Lot of Kingship]
One of them is called the Lot of Kingship, which is needed for the world-years; it is taken by day from Mars to the Moon, and cast out from the ascendant degree at the revolution of the year of the great conjunction to know the affairs of kings, which indicates a major change in the affairs of the nation.

[Alternative Lot of Kingship Calculation]
And there are those who derive this lot in another way: it is taken from the ascendant degree at the revolution of the year of the conjunction to the degree of the conjunction, and it is cast out from the ascendant degree at the revolution of the year.

[Another Alternative Lot of Kingship Calculation]
And there are those who derive it in another way: it is taken from the degree of the Midheaven line opposite the place of the Sun to the Midheaven line opposite the revolution of the year, and it is cast out from the place of Jupiter.

[Lot of the Number of Days of Kings]
The lot of the number of days of kings, which is taken in the year of the king's accession from the Sun to 15 degrees of Leo, and cast out from the place of the Moon.

[Alternative Lot for Days of Kings]
And it is also taken from the place of the Moon to 15 degrees of Cancer, and cast out from the place of the Sun.

[Relationship of King's Lots]
Know that these two lots will always appear in houses belonging to the same planet. And if one lot appears in the house of one luminary, the second lot will appear in the house of the other luminary.

[Another Lot for King's Accession]
Another lot in the year of the king's accession is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn, and by night the opposite, and it is cast out from the ascendant degree at the revolution of the year.

[Lot for Jupiter in Bicorporal Sign]
If Jupiter is in a bicorporal sign, and the revolution is by day, and Jupiter is in a cadent house, it is taken from Saturn to Jupiter, and thirty degrees are added to the distance, and it is cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot for Saturn Opposite Jupiter]
If Saturn is opposite Jupiter and both are in cadent houses, half the distance between them is taken and cast out from the ascendant.

[Lot for Jupiter in Exaltation]
If Jupiter is in the house of its exaltation and the revolution is by night, it is taken from it to Saturn and cast out from the ascendant.

[The Two Great Lots]
There are two great lots.

[First Great Lot Calculation]
One of them is that you observe in the year of the king's accession where the place of the triplicity conjunction that occurred before the king's accession arrived in that year. Assign one year for every thirty degrees, and one month for every two and a half degrees. And when you know the degree that the calculation reaches, from there you will rectify the first lot.

[Rectifying the First Great Lot]
Know the revolution of the year of the king's accession, and observe whether Saturn or Jupiter is oriental to the Sun. Take the distance between it at the beginning of the revolution of the year and the degree I mentioned, for from there you will rectify the lot, and cast out the remainder from the ascendant at the beginning of the revolution of the year, and there is the lot.

[Second Great Lot Calculation]
And the second lot, you will look at Jupiter or Saturn, which of them is occidental to the Sun at the moment of the revolution of the year? And take the distance between it and the degree I mentioned, from which you rectified the first lot, and cast out the remainder from the ascendant degree at the revolution of the year.

[Lot of Rain]
The lot of rain: By day, take from the degree of the conjunction of the luminaries to the degree of the Moon, and by night from the Moon to the degree of the conjunction. Cast it out from the ascendant sign in the morning or evening, and where the calculation ends, there is this lot.

[Predicting Rain from the Lot]
And if one of the inferior planets is with this lot in one of the angles, know that when the Moon reaches the place of that planet, then there will be rain. And this will be in every country where the sign in which the Moon is located has dominion over it.

[Enoch's Lot of Rain]
And Enoch said that it should be taken every day from the place of the Sun to the place of Saturn, and the result you cast out in the morning from the place of the Moon, and there is the lot. And this matter is proven.

[Rain Lot Interpretations]
If the lot falls in one of Saturn's houses, there will be cold. If in one of Jupiter's houses, there will be winds. If in one of Mars' houses, there will be heat. If in one of Venus' houses, there will be rain or fog. If in one of Mercury's houses, there will be strong winds. If in the Moon's house, there will be clouds or rain. And if in the Sun's house, the air will be clear.

[Lot of Pestilence]
The lot of pestilence, whether it will be or not: Take the distance between the Sun and the lord of the hour. Whatever it is, calculate it by the complete distorted hours that have passed from the day or from the night, and keep the result. Then take the degrees of the sign where the lord of the hour is, according to the latitude of the land, and calculate it by seventy. Divide the result by twelve, and add the quotient to what was kept. Cast out the total from the place of the lord of the hour, and there is the lot.

[On Aspects and Directions]
The purpose of these directions is, when you direct a planet or an ascendant to the body of a planet or to its ray, to know how many degrees are between them. (2) Through directions, all good and evil that will befall kings is known, and the victory of one kingdom over another, and changes that will occur in the world in general and in particular, whether for good or from good to evil. (3) And there are five ways of directing. (4) The first is to know the affairs of the world in general, such as the flood and drought that will destroy the world, or matters of states like wars, and the emergence of new doctrines. (5) And behold, the world will be under the power of a thousand years, and one year in this direction is one and forty-eight seconds. (6) The second direction is under the direction of the thousands, and it indicates what will happen to every people and nation, and every region. (7) And behold, the world will be under the power of each sign for one hundred years, and one year in this direction is eighteen parts. (8) The third way is under the direction of the hundreds, and it indicates all that will happen in every country and every family. (9) And behold, the world will be under the power of the sign for ten years, and every person will be under the power of ten years until the end of one hundred and twenty years; and one year in this direction is three degrees. (10) The fourth way is the direction called Al-Fardar. Thus they direct it in the affairs of the world, and they begin from every planet that has its ancient dignity opposite the sign of Aries. Only for those born by day do they begin from the Sun, and by night from the Moon; and the total sum of the times of Al-Fardar is seventy-five. (11) The fifth way is the direction of the unities in the affairs of the world, to know all that will happen year by year. And behold, also in a nativity, one year will be under the power of one sign, and this is called the returning sign. And behold, this direction is completed in twelve years, and one year is thirty degrees, which are the degrees of one sign.

[Great, Middle, and Small Conjunctions]
And thus you should direct the Great Conjunction until Saturn and Jupiter transfer from one triplicity to another until they return to their first place, and this will be in nine hundred and sixty years; and one year is twenty-two first parts, sixteen second parts, and five third parts. (2) You should also direct the Middle Conjunction, which is the transfer of the aforementioned from one triplicity to another, and this will be in two hundred and forty years; and one year is one degree, twenty-nine first parts, and four second parts. (3) You should also direct the Small Conjunction by transferring the aforementioned from sign to sign within the houses of the triplicities, and this will be approximately every twenty years.

[Stars in Zodiacal Constellations]
There are 346 stars in the zodiacal constellations.

[Aries: Horns and Abdomen]
The first sign is Aries, and in it are 13 stars: its horns and its abdomen.

[Taurus: Kimah on its Back]
In the sign of Taurus are 23 stars; Kimah is on its back.

[Gemini to Pisces Stars]
In Gemini 18, Cancer 13, Leo 25, Virgo 26, Libra 13, Scorpio 13, Sagittarius 18, Capricorn 28, Aquarius 29, Pisces 34.

[Southern Constellations and Stars]
There are 15 southern constellations, and in them are 316 stars.

[Sea-Lion (Cetus) with 22 Stars]
The Sea-Lion, and some call it the Bear, and in it are 22 stars.

[Mighty Dog (Orion) with 38 Stars]
The Mighty Dog, and in it are 38 stars.

[The River (Eridanus) with 34 Stars]
The River, and in it are 34 stars.

[The Hare (Lepus) with 13 Stars]
The Hare, and in it are 13 stars.

[The Greater Dog (Canis Major) with 18 Stars]
The Greater Dog, and in it are 18 stars.

[The Lesser Dog (Canis Minor) with 2 Stars]
The Lesser Dog, and in it are 2 stars.

[The Ship (Argo) with 45 Stars]
The Ship, and in it are 45 stars.

[The Ship (Argo Navis)]
The Ship

[The Snake (Hydra)]
The Animal (meaning Snake)

[The Goblet (Crater)]
The Goblet

[The Crow (Corvus)]
The Crow

[The Lion Carrier (Centaurus)]
The Lion Carrier

[The Leopard (Lupus)]
The Leopard

[The Firepan (Ara)]
The Firepan

[The Crown (Corona Australis)]
The Crown

[The Southern Fish (Piscis Austrinus)]
The Southern Fish

[Northern Constellations Total]
There are twenty-one northern constellations, and in them are three hundred and sixty stars.

[Ayish and Her Sons (Ursa Minor)]
Ayish and her sons, and in it are seven stars.

[The Greater Bear (Ursa Major)]
The Greater Bear, and in it are seventeen stars.

[The Dragon, 31 Stars]
The Dragon, with 31 stars.

[The Blazing One, 11 Stars]
The Blazing One, with 11 stars.

[The Barking Dog, 22 Stars]
The Barking Dog, with 22 stars.

[The Northern Crown, 8 Stars]
The Northern Crown, with 8 stars.

[The One Crawling on his Knees, 28 Stars]
The One Crawling on his Knees, with 28 stars.

[The Falling Eagle, 10 Stars]
The Falling Eagle, with 10 stars.

[The Hen, 17 Stars]
The Hen, with 17 stars.

[The Woman Sitting on a Chair, 13 Stars]
The Woman Sitting on a Chair, with 13 stars.

[The Carrier of the Devil's Head, 26 Stars]
The Carrier of the Devil's Head, with 26 stars.

[The Shepherd with the Reins, 14 Stars]
The Shepherd with the Reins in his Hand, with 14 stars.

[The One who Holds the Snake, 24 Stars]
The One who Holds the Snake, with 24 stars.

[The Snake, 18 Stars]
The Snake, with 18 stars.

[The Devil, 5 Stars]
The Devil, with 5 stars.

[The Flying Eagle, 9 Stars]
The Flying Eagle, with 9 stars.

[The Sea Fish, 10 Stars]
The Sea Fish, with 10 stars.

[The Horse's Head, 4 Stars]
The Horse's Head, with 4 stars.

[The Winged Horse, 20 Stars]
The Winged Horse, with 20 stars.

[The Woman with No Husband, 23 Stars]
The Woman with no Husband, with 23 stars.

[The Triangle, 4 Stars]
The Triangle, with 4 stars.

[Magnitude: Honor]
Magnitude, in Hebrew 'kavod' (honor).

[48 Stars of Second Magnitude]
48 of the second magnitude.

[Ancients' Star Lists]
The Ancients... resembling clouds.

[Seven Orbs to Earth]
Seven... to the Earth.

[Signs and Elements]
The signs... nature of water.

[Saturn: Cold and Dry]
Saturn is cold... cold and moist.

[Eccentric Circle]
The solid circle that is not the center of the Earth.

[Ecliptic]
The girdle of the vest of the zodiac.

[The Dragon]
The Dragon

[Planets and Decan]
Dominion

[Six Signs from Aries to Virgo]
North

[Fiery Sign]
Fiery sign

[Masculine, Diurnal by Nature]
Masculine, diurnal by nature.

[Eastern Signs]
Eastern

[Spring Season]
The spring season.

[Tropical Signs]
Tropical because the season changes in it.

[Day and Night Lengths]
At its beginning... nights shorter.

[Equal and Crooked Hours]
Its hours... equal.

[Rising Times]
Its rising times... is crooked.

[Significations of Cold]
All of it signifies... (it generates) cold.

[Sign Shape, Limbs, and Voice]
It has the form ... half a voice.

[Sign's Position and Wind]
The heart ... east wind.

[Sign's Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Fire is its portion ... and it is saffron.

[Animals, Metals, and Plants of Signs]
Of the animals ... iron, and copper.

[Climates, Countries, and Cities]
The third climate ... its portion.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
The Ancients ... hours 4.

[Kanakah and the Nine Digits]
The number that is nine digits. Then, from the mouth of the sage, through the Jewish translator of Ishmael, a sage named Jacob Ben Sharah, he translated the book of the tables of the seven servants, and all the work of the earth, and the ascensions, and the declination, and the ascending degree, and the correction of the houses, and the knowledge of the upper stars, and the eclipses of the luminaries.

[Nose]
Nostril.

[Head Resembles Sores]
The head resembles sores.

[Pains of Planets in Signs]
In the opinion of the Egyptian... the knees.

[Noblemen]
Noblemen.

[Human Beings and Travelers]
Human beings... and travelers.

[Detriment]
Hate.

[Present Time: 4908]
At this time, which is the year 4908.

[House of Mars]
It is the house of Mars... 4908.

[Lords of Triplicity]
The lords of the triplicity... by day and by night.

[The first decan to Jupiter]
The first decan ... to Jupiter.

[These are the terms ... Saturn 4°]
These are the terms ... Saturn 4°.

[First ninth-part ... lord of the sign]
The first of its ninth-parts ... lord of the sign.

[Enoch]
Enoch.

[Power of dodecatemoria ... the sign itself]
The power of the dodecatemoria ... the sign itself.

[Indian scientists ... is the 19th]
The Indian scientists ... is the 19th.

[End of the river ... Jupiter and Venus]
End of the river ... Jupiter and Venus.

[Earthy Nature]
Of earthy nature.

[Feminine and Nocturnal]
Feminine.

[Spring Season]
Of the spring season.

[Fixed Sign]
It remains in the same pattern (fixed).

[Longer Hours, Crooked]
Its hours are longer and it is crooked.

[Benefic and Hot]
It is one of the benefic and burning (hot) signs.

[Shape and Voice]
It has the form and half a voice.

[Right Side, South Wind]
The right (side) and south wind.

[Cold Nature, Green and White]
Its nature is cold, green and white.

[Animals, Plants, Pleasant Smell]
Of the animals, plants, and their smell are pleasant.

[Climates and Terrestrial Places]
Of the climates and dry places where plants can grow.

[Letters, Years, Hours]
Of the letters, years, and hours 16.

[Stream at River's End]
The stream of water, which is at the end of the River.

[Beginning and Middle of River]
The beginning and middle of the River.

[The One Holding the Reins]
The One Holding the Reins.

[First Decan, River's Beginning]
In its first decan... beginning of the River [Eridanus].

[Born with Eye Disease]
One who is born in it will have a disease in his eyes.

[Human Born: Eunuch or Androgynous]
A human being born in it... eunuch or androgynous.

[Body Parts: Shanks]
Its portion of the human body... the shanks.

[Sign of Diseases, Like Aries]
It is one of the signs of diseases, like Aries.

[Human Beings: Dance]
Of human beings... and dance.

[House of Venus, Twelfth to Mars]
It is the house of Venus... twelfth to Mars.

[Degrees: Beginning to 30th]
From the beginning... and 30th.

[Perseus: Mixture of Venus]
There, in (the degrees of)... mixture of Venus.

[Algol: Venus and Saturn]
(We also find there)... Venus and Saturn.

[Airy Nature]
Of airy nature.

[Western Sign]
Western.

[Spring Season]
Of the spring season.

[Bicorporal Sign]
Bicorporal.

[Day and Night Length]
At its end... days of the year.

[Hours and Rising Times]
Its hours are longer... rising times.

[Balanced Nature and Pestilence]
It indicates a balanced nature... deadly pestilence.

[Form and Sterility]
It has the form... is sterile.

[Right Side and West Wind]
The right (side)... west wind.

[Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Its nature is hot... many colors.

[Living Creatures and Winds]
Of living creatures... the winds.

[Climates and Musicians]
Of the climates... musicians.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters... hours 4.

[Dog's Shoulder and Foot]
The Dog's shoulder and its left foot.

[Hind of Taurus]
One of the hind of (the constellation) Taurus.

[Hero's Hand]
The Hero's [Orion] hand.

[Frightened Man]
A frightened man.

[The Dog]
The Dog.

[Ship's Oars]
The first oar of the Ship and part of the second oar.

[Ascending Decans]
In its first decan... part of the second oar.

[Physical Appearance and Traits]
A person... not be healthy.

[The left leg of the Twins]
There is the leg of the one who is aroused, which is the left leg of the Twins. Its star is Mars and Venus.

[Star on the left shoulder]
And a star on the left shoulder, its star is Mars and Mercury.

[Star in the Shepherd]
And the star of the Shepherd, its star is Jupiter and Saturn.

[The big star]
And the big star, its star is Saturn and Jupiter.

[The star at the middle]
And the middle star, its star is Jupiter and Saturn.

[The right shoulder]
And the right shoulder, its star is Mars and Mercury.

[The right leg]
And the right leg, its star is Mars and Venus.

[The dog called al-shi'ra al-abiir]
There is the dog called al-shi'ra al-abiir.

[Of the dim stars]
Of the dim stars, which is on the head of the Mighty One.

[Watery signs]
Of the watery signs.

[Northern sign]
Northern.

[Signs of summer]
Of the signs of summer.

[Tropical sign]
Tropical, for in it the season changes.

[Beginning of Cancer]
At its beginning, the nights lengthen.

[Hours longer]
Its hours are long, straight, and increasing.

[All of it indicates]
All of it indicates cold and moisture.

[Shape of aquatic animals]
Its form is the form of aquatic animals.

[The heart and north wind]
The heart and the north wind.

[The face of the Greater Bear]
The face of the Greater Bear.

[The first and second Twins]
The first and second Twins.

[The Lesser Dog]
The Lesser Dog.

[The Greater Dog]
The Greater Dog.

[The head of the Fighting Warrior]
The head of the Fighting Warrior.

[Head of the First Twin]
The head of the first Twin.

[Head of the Second Twin]
The head of the second Twin.

[The Dog Called Al-Shi'ra Al-Ghumaysa']
The dog called Al-Shi'ra Al-Ghumaysa'.

[Four Dim Stars]
Four dim stars.

[A Star with Latitude 6']
There is also a star.

[Fiery and Eastern]
One of the fiery signs... eastern.

[Sign of Summer]
One of the signs of summer.

[Fixed Sign]
It remains... no change in it.

[Straight and Long Rising Times]
Its rising times are straight and long.

[Burning Nature, Moist]
Its nature is burning... is moist.

[Shape and Voice]
It has the shape... half a voice.

[Direction and Wind]
The left (side)... east wind.

[Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Its nature is hot... saffron and yellow.

[Animals, Plants, Metals]
Of the animals... based on fire.

[Climates and Places]
Of the climates... a well-ventilated place.

[Letters, Years, Hours]
Of the letters... 13 hours.

[Man with a Thin Nose]
A man with a thin nose.

[Decans of Leo]
In its first decan... Fighting Warrior [Hydra].

[Physical and Psychological Traits]
A person... full of blemishes.

[Body Parts and Diseases]
Its portion of the human body... in its portion.

[Social Class and Profession]
Of human beings... fine craft.

[Planetary Rulerships]
It is the house of the Sun... twelfth to the Moon.

[Categories of Degrees]
From the beginning... 17th degrees.

[Alphard (Hydra)]
There [in the degrees of Leo]... Saturn and Venus.

[Regulus (Lion's Heart)]
The heart of the lion... causing death.

[Earthy and Nocturnal Signs]
One of the earthy... nocturnal signs.

[Southern Signs Classification]
Southern. Fits into the simplified classification of the signs according to their cardinal points, as formulated in Mm § 2:10. See note there. There is a similar reference to Capricorn later in § 2.10:1, but Taurus is omitted from this chapter although it belongs to the southern signs.

[Signs of Summer]
One of the signs of summer. This is identical with the account of Cancer in Rh § 2.4:2. See note there and at Rh § 2.1:4.

[Bicorporal Signs]
Bicorporal. Corresponds to Mm § 2:4, which lists and explains the bicorporal signs. See note there. The bicorporal, fixed, and tropical signs constitute a tripartite classification of the zodiacal signs in accordance with the season when the Sun travels through them in its annual path. Similar references are made in the current chapter of Rh to Gemini (§ 2.3:2), Sagittarius (§ 2.9:2), and Pisces (§ 2.12:2).

[Hours: Crooked vs. Equal]
Its hours... equal (hours). For lists of this type in the present chapter, specifying whether the 'crooked' or seasonal hours are longer or shorter than the 'equal' hours when the Sun in its annual path travels along the degrees of some sign, see Rh § 2.1:5 and notes.

[Day and Night Lengths]
At its end... all climates. The present chapter includes similar remarks of this type, referring to the change in the relative lengths of day and night, for all the tropical and bicorporal signs, but not for the fixed signs. See note on Rh § 2.1:4. Cf. Rh § 2.12:2.

[Nature and Temperament]
According to its nature... is temperate. Corresponds to the section on Virgo in Tb (II:1], 202). For lists of this type in the present chapter and Ibn Ezra's reliance on this chapter of Tb, see note on Rh § 2.1:6-9.

[Shape and Voice of Signs]
It has the shape... strong voice. For lists of this type in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, specifying the sign's shape and voice, see Rh § 2.1:10-11 and note. For the category of signs with a human shape, see Mm § 2:14 and note. Mk (VI:22, [2]:948) enumerates Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces in the category of signs indicating the species of birds. Ta (§ 352, 214) lists in the same category Gemini, Virgo, Pisces, and the hinder two-thirds of Capricorn.

[Direction and Wind of Signs]
The right (side)... south wind. For lists of this type in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, assigning to each sign a direction and a wind, and for the rationale behind this method of allocation of directions and winds to the signs, see Rh § 2.1:12 and note. Corresponds to Mk VI:25, [3]:972-974; quoted in App. 2, Q. 8, 3, 644-645.

[Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Its nature... purple and ochre. For lists of this type in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, assigning to each sign a nature, humor, taste, and color, see Rh § 2.1:13-14 and note. Corresponds to Mh 1:41, 19.

[Living Creatures and Plants]
Of living creatures... sorts of grains. For similar lists in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, assigning to each sign living creatures, plants, and trees, and in some cases metals and precious stones, see Rh § 2.1:13-14, and note.

[Climates, Countries, Terrestrial Places]
Of the climates... gynaecea and gardens. For lists of this type in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, assigning to each sign a climate, a list of countries and cities, and a list of terrestrial places, see Rh § 2.1:17-18 and note. The current passage corresponds to Mk VI:9, [8]:781-783 and Kitab al-milal wa-d-duwal 2000, I, [2], 514-515.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters... hours four. For similar lists in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, assigning to each sign letters, years, months, days, and hours, see Rh § 2.1:19-20 and note. The current passage corresponds to Mk VI:8, [9]:745-746.

[Star: Ear of Grain]
The star called ear of grain... snake. This is Ibn Ezra's translation of 'the star of the ear of grain, (which is in) the rear part of the Water Snake,' an expression used by Abu Ma'shar in Mk (VI:1, [31]:252), in the account of the constellations co-rising with the first decan of Virgo according to the Persians. In this expression, the star is x Vir (Spica); No. 14 in the constellation of Virgo in Ptolemy's star catalogue (Al, VII:5, 369), and the Water Snake is the constellation Hydra. This name for a Vir is unusual in the Arabic tradition, which usually calls this star al-simak al-a'zal, as Ibn Ezra does in Rh § 2.7:45 and § 2.148. See notes there.

[Part of Dragon's Tail]
Part of the tail of the Dragon. This is Ibn Ezra's translation of 'the tip of the tail of the Dragon,' Abu Ma'shar's reference in Mk (VI:1, [31]:257; in the account of the constellations co-rising with the first decan of Virgo according to Ptolemy) to a segment of Draco, the third northern constellation in Ptolemy's star catalogue. Ibn Ezra refers to Draco by the same Hebrew name in § 1.5:4, in the complete list of the 48 Ptolemaic constellations. See note there.

[Goblet on Warrior's Head]
The Goblet that is on the Warrior's head. This is Ibn Ezra's translation of 'the cup which is on the head of the Hero,' Abu Ma'shar's reference in Mk (VI:1, [31]:258-259; in the account of the constellations co-rising with the first decan of Virgo according to Ptolemy) to Crater, the ninth southern constellation in Ptolemy's star catalogue, and to Hydra, the eighth southern constellation in Ptolemy's star catalogue. See, respectively, Rh § 1.4:10 and Rh § 1.4:9, and notes.

[Inkwell (Nop)]
Inkwell, Hebrew Nop. I have preferred this reading, which is supported by only one manuscript copy, against the other six checked witnesses, which offer the alternative similar reading Nwp, meaning bow, because it agrees with 615, inkwell, which is what Abu Ma'shar's text offers for the corresponding locus. See Mk, VI:1, [32]:267. Cf. variae lectiones of Rh § 2.6:19.

[Crow's Head, Beak, Wings]
The head, beak, and wings of the Crow. This is Ibn Ezra's translation of 'the head, beak, and wing of the Crow,' Abu Ma'shar's reference in Mk (VI:1, [32]:269-270; in the account of the constellations co-rising with the second decan of Virgo according to Ptolemy) to a segment of Corvus, the tenth southern constellation in Ptolemy's star catalogue. Corvus is mentioned by the same name in Rh § 1.4:10, in the complete list of the 48 Ptolemaic constellations. See note there.

[Leg of the Animal (Centaurus)]
The leg of the Animal, Hebrew nnn ban. This is Ibn Ezra's translation of 'the leg of Centaurus,' Abu Ma'shar's reference in Mk (VI:1, [33]:279; in the account of the constellations co-rising with the third decan of Virgo according to Ptolemy) to a segment of Centaurus, the eleventh constellation in Ptolemy's star catalogue. Note that Ibn Ezra, as is his wont, refrains from Greek transliterations and refers to Centaurus as nnn. In RA § 14:12, in the complete list of the 48 Ptolemaic constellations, Ibn Ezra applies a different approach and designates this constellation 7787, the Lion Carrier. See note there.

[Paranatellonta of Libra Decans]
In its first decan... the Animal. This entire passage is a translation of Abu Ma'shar's account of the paranatellonta ascending with the first, second, and third decans of Libra according to the Persians, Indians, and Ptolemy in Mk (VI:1, [31-33]:248-279).

[Physical and Psychological Traits]
A person born... modest and wise. For lists of this type in each of the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter, describing the physical appearance and psychological traits of natives born when some sign rises, when the first, second, and third decans of this sign rise, and when the end of a sign rises, describing see Rh § 2.1:31-35 and note.

[Body Parts and Diseases]
Its portion... black bile. Analogous lists, enumerating the parts of the body and diseases associated with each sign according to the theory of melothesia, and the parts of the body associated with the planets in each sign according to the theory of the pains of the planets in the signs, occur in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter. For lists of this type and the astrological theories applied there, see Rh § 2.1:36-38 and notes. Note that the sections on Leo and Virgo in the present chapter do not list the pains of the planets in that sign.

[Social Class and Profession]
Of human beings... promotes laughter. Similar lists, establishing the social class, profession, and trade of human beings as a consequence of their being born when the corresponding sign is in the ascendant, occur in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter. For lists of this type and the astrological theory underlying them, see Rh § 2.1:39 and Mm § 2:12 and notes.

[Planetary Rulerships and Dignities]
It [Virgo]... twelfth to the Sun. Similar lists, specifying for each zodiacal sign the planets that are considered to be the lord of its planetary house, the lord of the house of detriment, the lord of the house of exaltation, the lord of the house of the dejection (and in some cases the planetary apogees, perigees, and nodes in the signs) the lords of the triplicities and their partners, the lords of the three decans and their order, the lords of the terms and their order and sizes, the lords of ninth-parts and their order, the lords of dodecatemoria and their order, occur in the sections on the twelve signs in the present chapter. For lists of this type and the astrological concepts employed there, see Rh § 2.1:40-50 and notes.

[Categories of Degrees]
From the beginning... 20th degrees. Analogous lists, localizing in the signs various categories of degrees which are taken to be endowed with astrological influence (i.e., bright, dark, mixed or intermediate, empty, masculine, and feminine degrees).

[Airy and Western]
One of the airy western signs.

[Autumn Sign]
One of the signs of autumn.

[Tropical Sign]
A tropical sign.

[Beginning of Libra: Days Shorter]
In its beginning, the days shorten.

[Hours Straight and Long]
Its hours are straight and long.

[Nature: Hot and Moist]
Its nature is hot and moist.

[Shape of a Solitary Man]
Its shape is a solitary man.

[Heart and South Wind]
Its heart and the south wind.

[Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Its nature, humor, taste, and color are green and ochre.

[Living Creatures and Tall Trees]
Of living creatures and tall trees.

[Climates, Markets, Commerce]
Of the climates, markets, and commerce.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters, years, months, days, and 16 hours.

[Persian Scientists: Greater Bear]
Which the scientists of Persia call the Greater Bear.

[End of Horse's Tail and Rear]
The end of the Horse's tail and its rear.

[First Decan: Virgo and Her Feet]
In its first decan... Virgo and her feet.

[General Appearance: Sex or Androgyne]
In general... sex or androgyne.

[Portion: Dim Vision]
Its portion... dim vision.

[Human Beings: Food and Drink]
Of human beings... food and drink.

[Opinion: The Chest]
In the opinion... the chest.

[Libra: House to Mercury]
It [Libra] is the house... twelfth to Mercury.

[Beginning to 21st Degrees]
From the beginning... 21st degrees.

[Libra Degrees: Venus and Mercury]
There [in the degrees of Libra]... Venus and Mercury.

[Leaning on Jupiter]
There (we find the one leaning on)... Jupiter.

[Fixed Signs]
It remains in the same pattern.

[Hours: Straight and Long]
Its hours... straight and long.

[Indicates Southern Cold]
It indicates... southern, it is cold.

[Shape of a Scorpion]
Its shape is like a scorpion.

[Left Side, North Wind]
The left (side)... north wind.

[Phlegm, Green and Ochre]
The phlegm... green and ochre.

[Living Creatures, Medium Height]
Of living creatures... medium height.

[Climates: Land of Sheba]
Of the climates... the land of Sheba.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters... hours 4.

[Paw of the Lesser Bear]
The paw of the Lesser Bear.

[Head of the Dog, Right Foreleg]
The head of the Dog and its right foreleg.

[Fish Called Dolphin]
The fish called Dolphin.

[The Southern Fish]
The Southern Fish.

[First Decan to Southern Fish]
In the first decan... the Southern Fish.

[Person Born: Nativity of Women]
A person born... nativity of women.

[The Thighs]
The thighs.

[Human Body: The Eyes]
Of the human body... the eyes.

[Human Beings: Shepherds]
Of human beings... shepherds.

[Capricorn: By Night]
It [Capricorn]... by night.

[Egyptian Opinion: The Intestines]
In the opinion of the Egyptian... the intestines.

[First Decan to Twelfth Jupiter]
The first decan... the twelfth to Jupiter.

[Aquarius: Airy, Masculine, Western]
One of the airy, masculine, western signs.

[Aquarius: Winter Sign]
One of the signs of winter.

[Aquarius: Fixed Sign]
It remains in its pattern (a fixed sign).

[Aquarius: Crooked and Short Hours]
Its hours are crooked and short.

[Aquarius: Nature and Clouds]
Its nature is cold and dry, bringing clouds.

[Aquarius: Human Shape, Alone]
Its shape is that of a human being, alone.

[Aquarius: Left Side, Wind]
The left side of the winds belongs to it.

[Aquarius: Blood and Ochre]
Of the humors, blood; and of the colors, ochre.

[Aquarius: Human Beings, Ugly Person]
Of human beings, the ugly person.

[Aquarius: Climates, Countries, Cities]
Of the climates, the fourth climate; and of the countries and cities that are in its portion.

[Aquarius: Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters, and of the years, and of the months, and of the days, and of the hours, six.

[Aquarius: Head of First Horse]
The head of the First Horse.

[Aquarius: Body and Head of Second Horse]
The body and head of the Second Horse.

[Aquarius: Middle of Southern Fish's Belly]
The middle of the belly of the Southern Fish.

[Aquarius: First Decan Paranatelonta]
In the first decan... the Southern Fish.

[Aquarius: Native's Appearance and Traits]
A person born... his undertakings.

[Aquarius: Body Parts and Eyes]
Its [Aquarius']... the eyes.

[Aquarius: Professions and Trades]
Of human beings... and tanners.

[Aquarius: Planetary Rulerships]
It [Aquarius]... present time.

[Aquarius: Egyptian Body Parts]
In the opinion of the Egyptians... the pudenda.

[Aquarius: Triplicity, Decan, Term Lords]
The lords of the triplicity... twelfth to Saturn.

[Watery and Northern Sign]
One of the watery... northern.

[Sign of Winter]
One of the signs of winter.

[Bicorporal Sign]
Bicorporal.

[Equal Day and Night]
At its end, day and night are equal.

[Crooked and Short Hours]
Its hours... crooked and short.

[Increases and Generates Water]
All of it increases... generates water.

[Shape of a Fish]
Its shape is a fish.

[Right Side: North and East]
The right (side)... north and east.

[Nature, Humor, Taste, Color]
Its nature... strange colors.

[Living Creatures, Plants, Stones]
Of the living creatures... and onyx.

[Climates, Countries, Terrestrial Places]
Of the climates... and lakes.

[Letters, Years, Months, Days, Hours]
Its letters... hours 12.

[Rear of the Viper]
The rear of the Viper.

[Decans and Rising Constellations]
In the first decan... the Viper.

[Physical Appearance and Traits]
A person born... commit suicide.

[Body Parts and Diseases]
In its [Pisces']... signs of diseases.

[Sign of Diseases]
It is one of the signs of diseases.

[Human Beings in its Portion]
Of human beings... in its portion.

[Planets and Body Parts]
The Egyptians said... the thighs.

[Planetary Rulerships]
It [Pisces] is the house of Jupiter... twelfth to Saturn.

[Categories of Degrees]
From the beginning... 20th degrees.

[Fixed Star Scheat]
There [in the degrees of Pisces]... Mars and Mercury.

[Kimah: Pleiades' Planetary Mixture]
Kimah is a mixture of Mars and the Moon.

[Aldebaran: Nature of Mars]
The eye of the bull... the nature of Mars alone.

[Castor and Pollux: Nature of Mars]
The two bright ones... the nature of Mars.

[Stars in Leo's Head: Mars]
The stars in the head... somewhat of Mars.

[Stars in Leo's Neck: Mercury]
The stars in its [Leo's] neck... somewhat of Mercury.

[Regulus: Mars and Saturn]
The bright star called the heart of the lion... Mars and Saturn.

[Stars in Virgo's Left Wing: Saturn and Mercury]
The stars in the left wing... Saturn and Mercury.

[Spica: Mercury]
The star called al-simak al-'azal... somewhat of Mercury.

[Stars on Libra's Pan: Jupiter and Mercury]
The two stars on the pan... Jupiter and Mercury.

[Star in Libra's Claws: Mercury and Mars]
The star in the claws... Mercury and Mars.

[Bright Stars in Scorpio's Back: Mars and Saturn]
The bright stars in the back... Mars and somewhat of Saturn.

[Antares: Jupiter]
(The star in) its [Scorpio's] heart... somewhat of Jupiter.

[Nebulae in Scorpio: Mars and Moon]
The nebulae there... Mars and the Moon.

[Nebulae in Sagittarius: Mercury]
The nebulae in (the constellation) Sagittarius... somewhat of Mercury.

[Stars in Water Stream: Jupiter]
The stars in the stream of water... somewhat of Jupiter.

[Stars at Pisces' End: Mercury]
The stars at the end of (the constellation) Pisces... somewhat of Mercury.

[Ecliptic]
Ecliptic, literally 'girdle of the vest'.

[Lesser Bear: Venus]
The bright (stars) in the Lesser Bear... somewhat of Venus.

[Greater Bear: Moon and Venus]
The (stars) in the Greater Bear, (which are called) 'ayish and her sons... Moon and Venus.

[Dragon stars: Saturn and Mars]
The stars of the Dragon are a mixture of Saturn and Mars.

[Blazing One stars: Jupiter and Saturn]
The stars of the Blazing One... Jupiter and Saturn.

[Stars in the Bed: Saturn and Mercury]
The stars in the bed... Saturn and Mercury.

[Bright star in Northern Crown: Venus and Mercury]
The bright star in the Northern Crown is a mixture of Venus and Mercury.

[One Crawling on Knees: Mercury]
The One Crawling on his Knees... nature of Mercury.

[Falling Eagle: Venus and Mercury]
The bright star called the falling eagle... Venus and Mercury.

[Bright star called the Hen]
The same... applies to the bright star called the hen.

[Bright star al-‘ayyiq: Mars and Mercury]
The bright star called al-‘ayyiq is a mixture of Mars and Mercury.

[Carrier of the Snake: Saturn, Venus, Mars]
The stars in the Carrier of the Snake... Saturn and somewhat of Venus; the stars in his back... Saturn and Mars.

[Flying Eagle: Jupiter and Mars]
The flying eagle is a mixture of Jupiter and Mars.

[Dolphin stars: Saturn and Mars]
The stars in the fish called Dolphin... Saturn and Mars.

[Bright stars in the Bow: Mars and Mercury]
The bright stars... Mars and Mercury.

[Stars in the Woman: Venus]
The stars in the Woman... nature of Venus.

[Stars in the Triangle: Mercury]
The stars in the Triangle are of the nature of Mercury.

[Bright star in the mouth: Venus and Mercury]
The bright star in the mouth... Venus and Mercury.

[Star with the Animal: Saturn]
The star with the Animal is of the nature of Saturn.

[Stars in Cetus]
The star in the shoulder... Mars and Mercury.

[Other bright stars in Orion]
The other bright stars are a mixture of Saturn and Jupiter.

[Stars of the River (Eridanus)]
The stars of the River are a mixture of Saturn and Jupiter.

[Stars of the Hare (Lepus)]
The stars of the Hare are a mixture of Saturn and Mars.

[Stars around the Dog (Canis Major)]
The stars around... Venus and Mercury.

[Stars in the mouth of the Dog (Canis Minor)]
In the mouth of the Dog... somewhat of Mars.

[Stars in the Warrior (Hydra)]
The stars in the Warrior... Saturn and Venus.

[Stars in the Ship (Argo Navis)]
In the Ship... Saturn and Mars.

[Bright star Kesil (Canopus)]
The bright star called Kesil... Jupiter and Saturn.

[Stars in the Horse (Centaurus)]
In the constellation of the Horse... Venus and Jupiter; and the bright ones in the throat... somewhat of Mars.

[Stars in the Southern Crown (Corona Australis)]
In the Southern Crown... nature of Mercury.

[Stars in the Hyena (Lupus)]
The stars in the Hyena... Saturn and Mercury.

[Stars of the Firepan (Ara)]
The stars of the Firepan... somewhat of Mercury.

[Seven signs form an aspect]
Seven signs form an aspect.

[Four kinds of aspects]
There are four kinds of aspects... 180 degrees.

[First Lord of the Triplicity]
The first lord of the triplicity.

[First Lord of Triplicity and Human Years]
The first lord of the triplicity... human years.

[Second Place]
The second place... the end (of human years).

[Third Place]
The third place... younger (brothers).

[Fourth Place]
The fourth place... any undertaking.

[Fifth Place]
The fifth place... (signifies) messengers.

[Sixth Place]
The sixth place... causes harm.

[Seventh Place]
The seventh place... (signifies) partners.

[Eighth Place]
The eighth place... (signifies) inheritance.

[Ninth Place]
The ninth place... (signifies) wisdom.

[Tenth Place]
The tenth place... (signifies) his craft.

[Chapter Four: On the Mixture]
Chapter Four: On the Mixture

[Saturn: Cold and Dry]
Cold and dry.

[Saturn: Nations, Ethiopians, Jews]
Of the nations, the Ethiopians and the Jews.

[Saturn: The Elderly, Privy-Cleaners]
Of the elderly and those who clean latrines.

[Saturn: Terrestrial Metals, Black Lead]
Of the terrestrial metals, black lead.

[Saturn: Black Lead and Rusty Iron]
Black lead and rusty iron.

[Saturn: Human Nature, Great Harm]
Of human nature, causes great harm.

[Saturn: With Respect to the Sun]
With respect to the Sun, as I shall explain.

[Saturn: Man's Nativity, Book of Nativities]
In a man's nativity, in the Book of Nativities.

[Saturn: Oriental of the Sun]
This is true if Saturn is oriental of the Sun, as I shall explain.

[Saturn: Human Body, Right Ear]
Of the human body, the right ear.

[Saturn: Infirmities, Chronic Pain]
Of its infirmities, any chronic pain.

[Saturn: Ages of Man, Old Age]
Of the ages of man, old age and the end of life.

[Saturn: Sides of the Horizon, East]
Of the sides (of the horizon), east.

[Saturn: Days of the Week, Shabbat]
Of the days (of the week), the day of Shabbat, and of the nights, the fourth night.

[Saturn: Letters, Shin, Nun]
Of letters, Shin and also Nun.

[Jupiter's Greatest and Least Years]
Its greatest years... the least are 12.

[Jupiter's Fardar Years]
The years... are 12.

[Jupiter's Body Power]
The power of its body... behind it.

[Mars: Harmful and Corrupting]
Harmful and corrupting... and separation.

[Mars and Human Nature]
Of human nature... its portion.

[Mars and Metals]
Of metals, iron.

[Mars and the Human Body]
Of the human body... right nostril.

[Mars and Infirmities]
Of infirmities... consumption.

[Mars and Ages of Man]
Of the ages of man, youth is its portion.

[Mars's Color]
Its color is intense red.

[Mars and Horizon Sides]
Of the sides (of the horizon), west.

[Mars and Days of the Week]
Of the days... first and eighth.

[The Sun's Day and Night]
Its day is the first day, of nights, the night of the fifth.

[Sun's Greatest and Least Years]
Its greatest years... its least years are nineteen.

[Sun's Fardar Years]
The years of al-fardar are ten.

[Sun's Bodily Power]
The power of its body... behind it.

[Venus and the Appetitive Soul]
In its portion is the appetitive soul.

[Venus and Islam]
And of the nations, those who follow the law of Ishmael, because their sign is Scorpio in the bounds of Venus, and Jupiter was in conjunction with Saturn.

[Venus and Copper]
Copper.

[Venus and the Bed Chamber]
The bed chamber.

[Venus and Family]
The mother... the younger sister.

[Venus and Human Ages]
Of the ages (of man)... thirteen years old.

[Venus and Direction]
Of the sides (of the horizon), east.

[Venus's Day and Night]
Its day is the sixth day, of nights, the night of the third.

[Venus's Greatest and Least Years]
Its greatest years... its least years are eight.

[Venus's Fardar Years]
The years of al-fardar are eight.

[Venus's Bodily Power]
The power of its body... behind it.

[Mercury's Mixed Nature]
Mixed and mutable... the signs.

[Mercury and the Human Soul]
The speaking soul... its portion.

[Mercury and the Tongue]
Know that Mercury signifies the tongue by day and by night, whether it is above the Earth or below the Earth. If it is in conjunction with Saturn, and there is no distance between them, or in a bad aspect with it, and Mars does not aspect it, and even if Saturn or Mercury is the ruler of the native, there is no doubt that the native will be heavy of tongue. And if Mercury is in the sign of Pisces, and it is more difficult if it is in the aforementioned judgment in one of the houses of muteness, it indicates that the native will be mute.

[Moon's Weaning Years]
It signifies the years of weaning.

[Moon's Four Years]
And behold, the reason for the Moon (ruling) until the child is weaned for four years, is that each year will be one sign, until the completion of four signs, which correspond to the four natures.

[Planetary Fortune and Weakness]
There is no need to seek a reason for them, for they are known.

[Malefic Aspect or Conjunction]
Or malefic planets do not aspect it and are not with it.

[Applies]
Connects.

[Intermediate]
Intermediate.

[Planet joined to the Sun]
joined to the Sun

[With benefic planets]
with benefic planets

[Places of lordship]
places of lordship

[Its Joy]
place of its highness

[Received]
received

[Similitude]
similitude or analogy

[Place of lordship]
place of lordship

[Benefic planets in rulership]
the same applies to the benefic planets when they are in the place where the luminaries exercise rulership

[Moderate good fortune]
moderate good fortune

[Auspices]
auspices

[Nature]
nature

[Planet in the north]
The planet ... in the north

[Ascends from Earth's center]
Or when it ascends... from the solid orb of apogee and perigee, far from the center of the Earth

[Second station]
Or when it is in the second station

[Moves away from Sun's ray]
Moves away from (being) under the ray of the Sun

[Three planets oriental of Sun]
Or when the three ... oriental of the Sun

[Sun in Libra]
Unless it [the Sun] is in Libra

[Lower planets occidental of Sun]
The three lower planets ... occidental of the Sun

[First station]
first station

[Retrograde and burnt]
retrograde ... burnt

[Under the ray of the Sun]
under the ray of the Sun

[Opposite to its similitude]
Opposite to its similitude.

[House of its dejection]
House of its dejection.

[Descends in the south]
Descends in the south.

[Path of burning]
Path of burning.

[House of its detriment]
House of its detriment.

[Not received]
Not received.

[Stranger in its position]
Stranger in its position.

[The place of its joy]
The place of its joy.

[A planet is weak]
A planet is weak.

[Head or tail of the Dragon]
Head or tail of the Dragon.

[Or with the Moon's Head]
Or with the Moon's Head.

[Misfortune of a planet]
The misfortune of a planet.

[An Indian scholar]
An Indian scholar.

[The Ancients said]
The Ancients said.

[A planet is weak]
A planet is weak.

[The first is that it is eclipsed]
The first is that it is eclipsed.

[12° between them]
12 degrees between them.

[You may know this]
You may know this.

[Which is opposite its place of joy]
Which is opposite its place of joy.

[The misfortune of the Moon]
The misfortune of the Moon.

[One of them]
One of them.

[Or when it is ascending]
Or when it is ascending.

[When its motion]
When its motion.

[Or when its number]
Or when its number.

[When a planet is 90°]
When a planet is 90 degrees.

[Planetary Light: Increasing and Decreasing]
If you wish to know ... its decrease.

[Ecliptic: Girdle of the Orb's Vest]
Girdle of the vest of the orb.

[Adding and Subtracting Minutes]
When you add ... the same minute.

[Upper Planets: Speeding Up]
For the upper planets ... speeding up.

[Planet's Latitude in the Ecliptic]
When the planet's latitude ... in the ecliptic.

[Planetary Conditions: Right and Left]
There are various conditions ... to its right.

[Saturn, Jupiter, Mars: Conditions with Sun]
Know that the three ... with respect to the Sun.

[First Condition: Planet Joined to Sun]
The first is when the planet ... in all its matters.

[Second Condition: Planet Burnt]
If the minutes ... away.

[Domain of Burning]
Domain of Burning.

[Third Condition: Under the Sun's Ray]
When (the distance is) ... all their indications.

[Eastern and Strong, Weakening Power]
They are called eastern ... the power of their easterliness begins to grow weaker.

[Sixth to Sixteenth Conditions]
From there until the first station ... (is the) sixteenth (condition).

[Venus and Mercury: Conditions with Sun]
But Venus and Mercury ... another way.

[Venus and Mercury: First and Second Conditions]
For when they are ... from the Sun is 7 degrees.

[Solitary Motion (Void of Course)]
Solitary motion.

[Desolate Planet]
The desolate one and the way that it sits alone.

[Translation of Light]
Translation.

[Clustering (Collection)]
Clustering.

[Lord of the Requested Place]
The planet that indicates the requested house.

[Lord of the Ascendant and Query]
Lord of the ascendant sign, lord of the object of the query.

[Reflecting the Light]
Reflecting the light.

[Giving Power]
Giving power.

[Giving Lordship]
Giving lordship.

[Giving Nature]
Giving nature.

[Giving Two Natures]
Giving two natures.

[Advance]
Advance.

[Planets in Cadent Places]
The planets are in the nature of Saturn and Mars; and behold, when the Sun or one of the serving planets is opposite them, then it will be like a person who has fallen into a pit.

[Dejection]
Lowness

[Pleasantness]
Pleasantness

[Recompense]
Recompense

[Reception]
Reception

[Strong Reception]
Strong reception

[Generosity]
Generosity

[Eighth Chapter: All Judgments are Known]
Eighth Chapter. There is no need to find a reason for all the judgments in it, for they are well known.

[Moon's Partnership with Ascendant]
The reason for the Moon's partnership with the ascendant sign is that it is close to the Earth.

[Malefics Aspecting Benefics]
If malefic planets aspect benefic planets, their evil diminishes.

[Benefic Not in Its Own Light]
If a benefic planet is not in its own light, or is a stranger in the sign, or cadent from the ascendant, or under the ray, then it is harmful.

[Quartile and Opposition Aspects]
And this indicates enmity, and because it is a quartile or opposition aspect, which is complete misfortune, it is logical that the trine and sextile, being aspects of love, would lessen the misfortune.

[Malefics as Strangers in a Sign]
The malefics, when they are strangers in the sign, meaning they are neither in their houses, nor in their exaltations, nor in their triplicity, increase evil and intensify misfortune.

[Malefic Lord of the Queried Matter]
And what they said, that if a malefic is the lord of the requested matter, it indicates a delay in the matter, this is true for Saturn because it tarries in its motion, but not for Mars.

[Planet's Weakness at Sign Cusp]
As for what they said, that a planet is weak until it is five degrees from the sign, this is the opinion of the Persian sages. But Ptolemy mocks them, and he is correct, because the signs are not separated from each other, given that their divisions, based on a mental construct, begin at the intersection of the two great circles or at a particular observable spot and end at another particular spot; by either method, the signs are not separated. The same applies to what they said, that if a planet is at the end of the first sign, it loses its power from that sign.

[Pits and Dark Stars]
As for the pits, we have already said that they are dark stars that indicate harm; this is what the sages of India said.

[Benefic in the Eighth House]
And what they said, that a benefic planet in the eighth house indicates neither good fortune nor misfortune, this is true; for it does not add to life or wealth, but it has one benefit: that one will be saved from an unnatural death.

[Prohibition Between Planets]
If a planet prohibits between them.

[Separation of Planets]
Separates.

[Translation of Light]
Transfers (power).

[The Significator in Interrogations]
The significator.

[Testimonies of the Significator]
And the testimonies we mentioned are sound, and in the Book of Nativities, I will speak about what is fit to give testimony and what is unfit.

[Lots in Astrology]
Lots.

[On the Lots]
On the Lots

[Lot of Fortune]
The Lot of Fortune

[Masha'allah, Indian Scientist]
An Indian scientist whose name was Masha'allah.

[Lot of the Moon]
The Lot of the Moon

[Lot of the Sun]
The Lot of the Sun

[Lot of Saturn]
The Lot of Saturn

[Lots of the Places]
These are the lots of the houses.

[First Place Lots]
The first is the lot of life.

[Second Place Lots]
The second house has three lots.

[Third Place Lots]
The third house has three lots.

[Fourth Place Lots]
The fourth house has seven lots.

[Fifth Place Lots]
The fifth house has five lots.

[Sixth Place Lots]
The sixth house has three lots.

[Revolution of the Year of the Great Conjunction]
Revolution of the year of the great conjunction.

[These are the lots... will they reign]
These are the lots... will they reign.

[Lot of Kingship]
One of them is the lot of kingship... the place of Jupiter.

[Lot of the Number of Days of Kings]
The lot of the number of days of kings... the place of the Sun.

[These two lots]
Know that these two lots... another luminary.

[Another lot in the year]
Another lot in the year... from the ascendant.

[Two Great Lots]
There are two great lots.

[First Great Lot]
One of them... the lot is there.

[Second Great Lot]
For the second lot... the revolution of the year.

[City Ruled by the Sign]
Every city that is ruled by the sign.

[The Upper Orb Above the Zodiac]
The upper orb, which is above the orb of the zodiacal signs.

[The Great and Honored Sphere]
Judgments of the Zodiacal Signs, in the name of God, who performs great deeds! (1) The great and honored sphere, where the honored hosts of heaven are named, is called the sphere of the fixed stars. (2) For below it are the spheres of the seven planets, and in the middle is the sphere of the twelve signs. The ancient sages divided the entire sphere into forty-eight constellations, of which twenty-one are to the north of the zodiacal line, and fifteen are to the south. (3) All judgments depend on the zodiacal signs, which are named after the stars that are close to the division point of each of the signs. (4) For they divided the sphere into 360 degrees, because this number has many divisors, and no smaller number can be divided into as many whole parts. (5) Furthermore, this number is close to the days of the solar year. (6) And behold, each sign has thirty straight degrees, whether the constellation is small or large. (7) And behold, the beginning of the signs is Aries, when the Sun is on the line of conjunction of the zodiacal sphere with the equatorial sphere, for then day and night are equal in all lands. (8) And then the Sun begins to incline to the north, to be close to the inhabited region, which consists of seven climates, for there is no habitation in the southern quarter because of the Sun's heat when it is opposite its height. (9) And it, at the beginning of Aries, is the true equinox, then the world is renewed.

[Beginning the Judgments of the Zodiacal Signs]
(1) And now I will begin to speak about the initial judgments of the zodiacal signs. (2) The cardinal signs: Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn. Explanation: For in these signs, the season changes, as they are the four seasons of the year. (3) The fixed signs: Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius. Explanation: In these, the seasons remain in their established pattern. (4) The mutable signs: Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces. Explanation: For these...

[Decans and Their Rulers]
(4) The same applies to the remaining signs: using the familiar initials S(aturn), J(upiter), M(ars), S(un), V(enus), M(ercury), M(oon), the mnemonic to follow is M-S-V-M-M-S-J, because you begin and end with Mars.

[The Ninth-parts and Their Rulerships]
(1) The Ninth-parts. The first ninth-part, which covers 3⅓ equal degrees, is under Aries’ power, the second ninth-part is under Taurus’ power, and so on until the last ninth-part is under Sagittarius’ power. (2) It is essential to begin counting from the head of the tropical sign among the signs (of one triplicity): if the ascendant sign is one of the signs (of the triplicity), find out its nature, whether fiery, earthy, airy, or watery, and begin counting from its tropical sign [i.e., from the tropical sign of that triplicity], for in each triad (of signs) of the same nature, one of them is a tropical sign and you should begin counting from it. (3) Assign 3⅓ degrees to each sign; the sign where the last ninth-part ends is where the power of the lord of this sign (which belongs to one of the triplicities that have the same nature) will be. (4) If this sign is Taurus, the first ninth-part is assigned to Saturn, the lord of Capricorn, which is a tropical sign. (5) The second (ninth-part) is assigned to it [Saturn], too, because its house is Aquarius, the third (ninth-part is assigned) to Jupiter, and the same applies if the sign is...

[Dodecatemoria: Calculation and Power]
and two-thirds of a degree. And behold, the first hundred. We divided them by 5, and behold, the twelfth part is in the twentieth degree of Scorpio. (3) There is a great need to know this for judgments of the world, nativities, and questions. (4) This is the opinion of the wise men of experience, as written in their books.

[House Divisions: Cardines and Their Strength]
(1) House Divisions: Every moment, by day or by night, the zodiacal circle is divided by four points. (2) The first is from the ascendant degree, whatever degree it may be, from whatever sign rises in the East, and this is called the first cardine. (3) And opposite it, in the seventh house, by the number of parts and degrees, is another point, and it is called the third cardine. (4) And in midheaven, above, is another point, and it is the fourth point, and opposite it, in midheaven below the earth, is a point, and it is called the second. (5) And behold, the circle is divided into four parts, and the wise men of astrological judgments also divided each part into three, and behold, this is always the case. (6) And these cardines are the strong houses; and four others are called succedent to the cardines, and they are the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses; and the other four houses are called cadent, and they are the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth. (7) And the best of the cardines are the first and the tenth; also the seventh is better than the fourth. And the best of the succedent are the eleventh and the fifth; also the second is better than the eighth. And the best of the cadent are the ninth and the third; also the twelfth is better than the sixth.

[House Cusps: Varying by Latitude]
(1) And the beginning of the houses changes according to the latitude of the lands, for sometimes the beginning of the tenth house, by the method of ascensions, will be in the ninth house by the number of right ascensions; and if the latitude of the land is very great, the beginning of the house will be in the eighth house by ascensions. (2) And the example: In this place, whose latitude is fifty and a half degrees, behold, if the rising sign was the beginning of Cancer, midheaven will be 24 right degrees from Aquarius, and with the astrolabe, it will also be clearly seen with one's eyes that there is no doubt in it, and the opposite if the rising sign was Capricorn. (3) And how you should do it: See the right degree rising from the sign and give 245 right degrees to the first house, and likewise for all the houses. (4) And this division is called the division of the plane and it has one-third power in the judgments of the zodiac.

[House Cusps: Rising Times and Quadrants]
(5) Calculate the cusps of all the houses by the method of rising times, as I showed you in the Book of Tables, and do not be disturbed if one house comes out small and another very large, or if two houses fall into one sign. The planet has two-thirds of the power when the houses are calculated by the division of rising times. (6) All astrologers designate the interval between the cusp of the tenth house calculated according to the division by rising times and the cusp of the fourth house as the ascending semicircle, and the interval between the cusp of the fourth house and the cusp of the tenth house as the descending semicircle. (7) The quadrant from the cusp of the tenth house according to the division by rising times to the cusp of the first house is southern and masculine; and the opposite quadrant, from the cusp of the fourth house to the cusp of the seventh house, is also masculine but northern. (8) The quadrant from the beginning of the ascendant sign to the cusp of the fourth house is eastern and feminine; and likewise the opposite quadrant, which begins at the cusp of the seventh house and ends at the cusp of the tenth house, is also feminine but western.

[Significations of the Twelve Houses]
(1) I now discuss the houses. The first house: It is called the house of a person's life, soul, body, and instinct, of their nature, thoughts, ingenuity, intelligence, and physiognomy. (2) The second house: the house of their wealth, possessions, assistants, and those who accept their authority; this is the house of ambush because something they never imagined, good or bad, will happen to them, in accordance with the nature of the benefic planet that is there in their nativity. (3) The third house: the house of brothers, kin, their sons-in-law and brothers-in-law, of short journeys and trivial dreams, and of the science of ordinances and laws. (4) The fourth house: the house of the father, of the father's father and ancestors, of their houses, storerooms, treasures, and any hidden valuable, of the outcome of everything, and of the grave where they will be buried. (5) The fifth house: the house of children, pleasures, food, drink, clothes, and gifts. (6) The sixth house: the house of slaves, sheep, cattle, diseases, fractures, and falls.

[Enoch on Conception and Birth]
(1) Enoch said in his book that the position of the Moon in the nativity of those born after approximately nine months (of pregnancy) is the ascendant at the time of conception, and the ascendant then [at birth] is the place of the Moon at the time of conception. (2) So if the Moon (at the time of conception) was close to the end of the sixth house, the time in the womb lasts 287 days, and if (the Moon) was at the cusp of the seventh house, the pregnancy lasts 259 (days), (if) at the upper cardine, 266 (days), and if at the ascendant degree, the gestation was 273 days, and at the lower cardine, 280. (3) And do not rely on the words of women, for they do not know the moment of conception. (4) And I have tried this many times, and it is true, on condition that the child is not born in the seventh month, for one born then will not live long. (5) There are also very few who are born in the eleventh month; they too will live, but they will be strange in their actions compared to all other people, according to the planetary arrangement.

[Planetary Influence on Fetal Development]
(1) The ancients said that the power that a person receives from Saturn is restriction and delay; and behold, it will serve in pregnancy for about one month, to establish the seed and freeze it. (2) And after it, Jupiter for about thirty days, and after it, Mars for about thirty days, and after it, the Sun for about thirty days, and after it, Venus for about thirty days, and it beautifies the form, and after it, Mercury for about thirty days, and the Moon serves in the seventh month, and behold, if the child is born, it will live. (3) And if it happens that the mother or that which is in her womb comes out in the eighth month, when Saturn's service returns, both will die. (4) And in the ninth month, Jupiter serves, which is the lord of life; if it comes out then, it will live. (5) Mars also, by its nature, hastens and brings forth; and behold, if it was strong at the moment of conception and the child came out in its month of service, the child will also live. (6) And if it remains until the eleventh month, when the Sun's service returns, it will live long.

[Calculating Gestation Period]
(1) And behold, if you wish to know approximately how long the child was in the womb, see if the Moon at the moment of birth was above the earth. See how many right degrees there are from the beginning of the seventh house to the place of the Moon, and take one day for every 13 degrees, and add the result to 259 days. (2) And if the Moon was below the earth, see the distance between the ascendant degree and the place of the Moon, and take one day for every 13 degrees, and add the result to 273. (3) And the sum is the days of gestation, and know that there will be a remainder that will not be divided. (4) And you must rectify the hours, so that you place the ascendant degree at the moment of conception where the Moon was at the moment of birth; and if you know the moment of conception, find out the place of the Moon (then), which will be the ascendant sign at the time of birth; (then) find out the position at the moment of birth of the degree of the ascendant at the time of conception, whether above or beneath the earth, and you will be able to know the (duration of the) pregnancy.

[Significations of the Remaining Houses]
(1) The seventh house: the house of women and partners, the house of his enemies who fight against him. (2) The eighth house: the house of death, worry, sadness and fear, and of inheritance from the deceased. (3) The ninth house: the house of long journeys, the sciences, intelligence, dreams, faith, and divine worship. (4) The tenth house: the house of kingship and greatness, renown, craftsmanship, and also the house of the mother. (5) The eleventh house: the house of lovers, good fortune, merchandise, profit, and magnificence. (6) The twelfth house: the house of riding animals, the house of those who are envious of him, of his enemies and cursers, the house of captivity, prison, and fetters.

[Ptolemy on Zodiac and Body Parts]
(1) King Ptolemy said: assign to the ascending sign (the corresponding part of the body) according to the method used by the astrologers to assign the signs to the parts of the body. (2) He said: (assign to) Aries the head, Taurus the neck, Gemini the arms, Cancer the chest, Leo the heart and the upper intestine, Virgo the abdomen and the diaphragm, Libra the hips, Scorpio the genitals, Sagittarius the back, Capricorn the thighs, Aquarius the calves, Pisces the feet. (3) Use this method to assign to the ascendant sign (its corresponding part of the body).

[Planetary Pains in Aries: A Method]
(1) The Ancients mentioned the pain of each planet in Aries: Saturn the chest, Jupiter the upper intestine, Mars the head, the Sun the back, Venus the feet, Mercury the calves, and the Moon the thighs. (2) There is no need to mention (the pain of) every planet in every sign, as the Ancients did at great length, but I shall offer you a comprehensive method for knowing them. (3) I have already told you that the Moon has one house, as does the Sun, and that each of the five planets has two houses. Know that the planet’s first house is that closer to Aries (moving counterclockwise). (4) Hence Saturn’s first house is Capricorn. Determine (the count from) Aries to Capricorn. (Answer:) it is the fourth, like the count from Cancer to Aries; inasmuch as Cancer governs the chest, the pain of Saturn in Aries is the chest. (5) Jupiter's first house is Sagittarius, so (the distance from) Aries to it [Sagittarius] is like (the distance from) Leo to Aries. (6) Because Aries is the house of Mars, therefore they said the pain of Mars is the head. (7) And because Aries is the ninth sign from Leo, which is the house of the Sun, like Sagittarius to Aries, they said that the pain is in the back. (8) And because Aries is the twelfth sign from Taurus, which is the first house of Venus, like Pisces to Aries, therefore they said the pain of Venus is the feet. (9) And because Aries is the eleventh sign from Gemini, which is the first house of Mercury, like Aquarius to Aries, they said that the pain of Mercury is the calves. (10) And because Aries is the tenth sign from Cancer, which is the house of the Moon, like Capricorn to Aries, therefore they said the pain of the Moon is the thighs. (11) And in this way, for every planet in every sign. (12) I have already revealed to you what the Ancients concealed and did not mention in their books, only saying, 'Thus we have seen and it has come into our hands.'

[Planetary Servants and Dignities]
(1) The Servants. Observe: if the servant, after you have rectified its place, is far from its place of exaltation, or from the ninth sign, or from the sign where it ascends to exaltation, and when it is in the place of exaltation, it is in its great strength. (2) And from there, up to three signs, it begins to descend from exaltation, and then it is considered in its great strength. (3) And when it is six signs away, then it is in its place of fall. (4) And behold, from three signs to six, it begins to descend to its fall, and from six signs to nine, it begins to ascend from its fall.

[Planetary Power in Elevation and Depression]
When it is in its exaltation, it is very good, and the opposite is true in its place of depression. (2) King Ptolemy disagrees with them, saying that when it is in its depression, it will be close to the Earth, then it will appear to the great eye and give power to receive on Earth. (3) I have tested them many times and found the words of the ancients and also the words of Ptolemy to be correct. (4) For the ruler, who is appointed over the native, has great power in the five places of rulership as I will explain, and he is appointed over the soul. If he is in his place of exaltation, it indicates a lofty, strong, and very wise soul, because the ruler is close to the sphere of the zodiac, and behold, the native will receive a superior power through the ruler. (5) But because he is far from the Earth, he will not have great power on Earth, even though he is wise, and if he was in his place of depression, his name would be great.

[Venus and Mercury Motion]
(1) The power of the Moon changes according to the four periods of the month: from the time of the Moon's conjunction with the Sun in its corrected motion up to 90 degrees, the Moon's power is hot and moist; from there up to 180 degrees, it is hot and dry; from there up to 270 degrees, where the Moon's place is 90 degrees distant from the Sun's place, the Moon is ahead of the Sun, this quadrant is cold and dry; and from there until the new moon, it is cold and moist. (2) And this applies to the quadrants for the six planets: from the superior planet's conjunction with the Sun until it reaches a quarter of the circle, which is 90 equal degrees, the planet is hot and moist; from there until the opposition, it is hot and dry, and then cold and dry, and then cold and moist. (3) Venus and Mercury, when they are with the Sun and are retrograde until the corrected anomaly is 9 signs, are hot and moist, and up to 12 signs, hot and dry, and from there up to 3 signs, cold and dry, and up to 6 signs, cold and moist. (4) And behold, it is clear that the nature of the rulers changes according to their configuration with the Sun.

[Retrograde Motion and Distances]
(1) Now I will write for you an important table to know how many degrees each planet retrogrades, and approximately how many days it will be retrograde. (2) And behold, the great distance is called such because the days of its retrograde motion are many; it is great because there is also a mean and a small distance, and this change comes from the solid sphere whose center is far from the Earth's center. (3) When Saturn conjoins the Sun, it moves ten degrees and then retrogrades. (4) The maximum distance: Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, in its exaltation. The mean distance: Leo, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, between exaltation and depression. The minimum distance: Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, in its depression. (5) After each planet, the degrees and minutes of the maximum distance and how many days, and likewise for the mean and minimum, are written.

[Conjunctions and Planetary Visibility]
(1) The conjunction: If there was a conjunction of one ruler with another ruler, and both are on the line of the zodiac, such that neither has latitude, then it will be a perfect conjunction, and the lower planet will obscure the upper one from sight. (2) And the superior planets cannot obscure the Sun, nor can the inferior planets, because they will always have latitude when they conjoin the Sun. (3) Furthermore, the body of Venus is very small, for it is one part out of 74 of the Earth's measure, and the Sun is very large, for the entire Earth is one part out of 166 of the Sun's measure, according to complete proofs from the science of measures. (4) And because Venus is close to the Earth, it has great light, and Mercury is very small, and when the Sun conjoins Venus in the sign of Pisces, and it has all its northern latitude, Venus will be visible to the eye, but not so for another ruler.

[Planetary Rulership in Conjunctions]
(1) Now if two rulers conjoin, see which of them is closer to the place of exaltation of the small circle; that one will rule and govern over what is in its place of depression, and from the corrected anomaly you can know this. (2) For if they were between exaltation and depression, see which one's corrected anomaly is smaller in number of degrees than the one whose corrected anomaly is larger; that one is the ruler; meaning: the one that has a small distance from the exaltation is very close to the exaltation. (3) And if they were between depression and exaltation, see which one's anomaly is larger than the number; that one is the ruler; meaning: the table appears in manuscript SNT; it does not appear in WAA MBK. Degrees; S: missing. See note on site. *+from the measure of the Sun*] MTNK; S: missing. It will be in the line of the zodiac or its southern latitude has half power in rulership to the northern. And if] SSTNBK; M: > was. ?And the second*] B; SSMTNK: the second. Pihamemshala*] MB; T: and the rulership; SSNK: in rulership. P8lahaveh] SSTBK; M: to read; N: taken. Power] SSNMTB; K: star. %Yilshafel] SSNKMT; B: the lower. *No] SSKMTB; N: missing. 5Yiham*] MTNB; SSNK: missing. E'nakh] SSNMBK; T: the power. "The latitude] SSKMTB; N: the small. [omy!8] SNTMK; SB: on them. L9yihambatim] SSNMTB; K: the aspect. 9*The first] SSTNBK; M: missing. In the zodiacal circle] SSKMTB; N: missing. [van22] SSKMTB; N: the judgment. Aspect] SSKMTB; N: missing. *And aspect] SSNKMT; B: and the second aspect. Is; S: > that; K: missing. And for them*] STNBKM; S: and for her. ? And he is the star of madness; B: > and madness. 'Male*] MTNBK; SS: male. And fever of the day and the third] SSNK; M: and the fever and the third; BT: and the fever of the day and the third. ?And the brothers-in-law*] NK; T: and the brothers-in-law; M: and the people; S: missing. ?Yih'af hasmali] SMTNB; K: the left nostril; S: the left ear. !Hakulia] SSNB; MK: bon on the mother] SSN; MTBK: on the father and on the mother. \And on the younger sisters] S; MTNBK: and on the sister. *Beautiful] SNKMTB; S: beautiful. P5Yialanot] SSTB; MNK: chains. E'mamosakh*] MTNBK; SS: average. In the side] SSNMTB; K: in the sides. %'The place of a person's bed]

[Mercury: Qualities and Associations]
Mercury: It signifies for every native the wise, understanding, wisdom, linguistic precision, making verses, and letters; it is the star of the king's scribes, accountants, and those who measure; and of crafts, if it is not in a bad place, it signifies every tailor, seamster, and weaver. (2) Its nature is changeable, sometimes hot, sometimes cold, sometimes moist, sometimes dry, sometimes masculine, sometimes feminine, sometimes good, sometimes bad, according to the nature of the planets aspecting it or conjoining it. (3) Ptolemy said: Any planet that is connected by aspect with the ascendant or with the Moon, the native's soul will not depart in its illness. (4) The general rule: it signifies the human soul, just as the Moon signifies the body's temperament, according to its value and place, and how it is with the ascendant sign. (5) Its portion of metals is quicksilver; its portion includes sheep and every small tree; its portion of the head is the tongue; and in the body, the left kidney, and it has a share in the intestines; its power is in the northern quarter. (6) Its form is thin-bodied with a long face; its place in the house is a scriptorium or a craftsman's workshop; it has dominion over slaves and servants, and it is the planet of poverty; minters are in its portion. (7) Its years of service for every native after Venus are 13 years. (8) Its portion of the days of the week is Wednesday, and of the nights, the night of the first day (Saturday night). (9) Its least years are 20, its middle years 48, and its great years 76.

[Five Places of Dominion]
Places of dominion: The first is the place of the Sun. The second is the place of the Moon. The third is the place of their conjunction that occurred before the native was born, if he was born in the half of the month before the Moon was full of light; and if after that, the place of the opposition. There is a disagreement among the Ancients, for some of them said that you should take the place of the luminary that is above the Earth at the moment of opposition, and some say that you should take the place of the one of them that is above at the moment of birth. The fourth place is the degree of the ascendant sign. The fifth is the place of the Lot of Fortune. (2) And how you will know it by day: Observe how many equal degrees and minutes there are between the place of the Sun and the place of the Moon, and add this number to the ascendant degree, in whatever sign it may be with its minutes, and the place where the number is completed is called the Lot of Fortune. (3) For one born at night, according to Ptolemy, the Ancients said that because the power of the Moon is greater than the power of the Sun for one born at night, you should take the distance between the Moon and the Sun, and add this number to the ascendant degree, and then you will find the Lot of Fortune. (4) And I say that Ptolemy's words are correct, because the ascendant degree depends on the Sun, and it is proper that the distance of the Lot of Fortune from the ascendant degree should be the same as the distance of the Sun's degree from the Moon's degree.

[Planetary Powers and House Strength]
And now I will explain to you the power of the planets. (2) Observe what dominion each planet has in the five places of dominion, and also in the planet's own place. (3) Assign five powers to the lord of the house, four to the lord of the exaltation, three to the lord of the triplicity, two to the lord of the term, and one to the lord of the decan. (4) And then observe in which of the twelve houses the planets are, and the division of the houses by rising times as I have mentioned. And assign to the planet in the first house 12 powers; and if in the tenth, 11; and if in the seventh, 10; and if in the fourth, 9; and if in the eleventh house, 8; and if in the fifth, 7; and if in the second, 6; and if in the eighth, 5; and if in the ninth, 4; and if in the third, 3; and if in the twelfth, 2; and if in the sixth, 1. (5) King Ptolemy said: if the planet is less than five degrees from the beginning of the house according to the division of rising times, it is considered to have the power of the house. And the Ancients said it has no power of the house until it is at its beginning, and the sages of Persia said that when it is less than five degrees, it has power in the house, but it is not complete, for if it is one degree away from the beginning, it will lack one-fifth of the house's power. And in this way, you should take the value, and there is no need to elaborate.

[Judgments of Planetary Interactions]
And now I will begin to speak about the judgments of the planets as the Ancients experienced them, and there is no disagreement among them. (2) Judgments of the planets: The lower planet will always give power to the one higher than it, whether in conjunction or in one of the aspects. (3) And if two or three or more planets are in aspect to it, it will give power to the one closest in degrees of aspect. And if it receives power, it will be the disposer, unless it also gives power to one higher than it, whether in conjunction or in one of the aspects. For if it gives, the third planet is the disposer, and the judgment is according to the power of the disposer from the value of the ascendant degree, and its value to the two luminaries, and its dominion in its place. (4) And the one who gives power for many things: for if it gives power from the house of the higher planet or from its house of exaltation, then the higher one will receive it with complete love, if it was in conjunction or in a trine aspect or an aspect.

[Saturn's Lot]
The lot of Saturn: From Saturn to the Lot of Fortune, and this number from the Ascendant. It signifies imprisonment, suffering, and captivity. Observe if it is in one of the cardines and according to the aspects.

[Jupiter's Lot]
The lot of Jupiter: From Jupiter to the Lot of the Absent, and this number from the Ascendant. It signifies the native's intelligence, success, and wealth.

[Mars' Lot]
The lot of Mars: From Mars to the Lot of Fortune, and this number from the Ascendant. It signifies the native's strength, endurance of labor, and inclination to enter dangerous places.

[Venus' Lot]
The lot of Venus: From the Lot of Fortune to the Lot of the Absent. It signifies the body's constitution, beauty of form, joy, and pleasures.

[Mercury's Lot]
The lot of Mercury: From the Lot of the Absent to the Lot of Fortune, and this number from the Ascendant. It signifies poverty, confusion, and losses.

[Lots of the Houses]
I will also mention the lots of the houses.

[Lot of Life]
The first house. The lot of life: From Jupiter to Saturn, and this number from the Ascendant.

[Casting Lots]
All these aforementioned lots are to be cast in this manner for the native, whether by day or by night.

[Lot of Man's Nature]
The lot of man's nature: Take from the Sun's place to 15 degrees of Leo, and add this number to the Moon's place, and see in which servant's house this lot falls. Also take from the Moon's place to 15 degrees of Cancer, and add this number to the Sun's place; then the lot will fall in the other house of the same servant in whose house the first lot fell. If the first lot falls in the house of one of the luminaries, the other lot will fall in the house of the other luminary. There is no doubt that this will always be so, and it is because the arrangement of the servants' houses with respect to the Sun's arrangement is the same as the Moon's arrangement to the servant; and at the midpoint of the sign, the distance changes. These two lots indicate the native's nature, according to the power of the lord of the house.

[Lot of Wealth]
The second house. The lot of wealth: From the place of the lord of the second house to the beginning of the house as it appears in the division of the ascensions, and this number from the Ascendant. This lot signifies money, wealth, and possessions.

[Lot of Brothers]
The third house. The lot of brothers: From Saturn with Jupiter, and according to this number from the Ascendant. And the sages of Persia said that the lot of brothers is from the place of the lord of the Ascendant to the place of Mars, and this number from the Ascendant.

[Lot of Wisdom]
The ninth house. The lot of wisdom: From Saturn to Jupiter, and add this number to the place of Mercury.

[Lot of Land Journeys]
The lot of land journeys: From the lord of the ninth house in the division of ascensions to the beginning of the house, and add this number to the ascendant degree.

[Lot of the Mother]
The tenth house. The lot of the mother: By day, from Venus to the Moon, and add this number to the ascendant; and by night, the opposite.

[Lot of Honor]
The lot of honor: By day, from the Sun to 19 degrees of Aries, and add this number to the ascendant degree; and by night, from the Moon to its degree of exaltation.

[Lot of Lovers]
The eleventh house. The lot of lovers: By day and by night, from Jupiter to Venus, and add this number to the ascendant degree.

[Lot of Found Objects]
The lot of found objects: By day and by night, from the Sun to Venus, and add this number to the ascendant degree.

[Lot of Enemies]
The twelfth house. The lot of enemies: From Mars to Saturn by night, and by day the opposite, and add this number to the ascendant degree.

[Lot of Animals]
The lot of animals: From the lord of the twelfth house in the division of ascensions to the beginning of the house, and add this number to the ascendant degree.

[Tested Lots and Other Opinions]
These lots that I have mentioned are the tested ones; for the astrologers mentioned many others, but the common opinion did not agree on them, therefore I have not mentioned them.

[Two Methods of Directions]
The directions: You need to direct the five places of dominion by two methods.

[Equal Degree Directions]
One method is by equal degrees, for each degree a full year, and according to the parts of the degree, there will be days of the year.

[Term to Term Directions]
And behold, the direction from term to term, you should mix it according to the rule, whether for good or for evil, the lord of the term with the lord of the sign.

[Aspects in Directions]
But if there is a ray of an aspect from one of the serving planets, it is stronger by itself than the lord of the house and the term together, and its strength will remain until the end of the strength of the serving planet's ray, whether in conjunction or in aspect, according to the number of the ray.

[Direction Power and Rising Times]
And you shall give to this direction a third of the strength of the direction, according to the method which is the direction of the rising times.

[Direction Illustration: Illness and Wealth]
Illustration: If the first direction indicates illness, it will not be severe; but if it is by the second method, it will be very severe. And if the first indicates wealth, it will not be as abundant as the last.

[Directing the Ascendant]
And thus you shall do: If the place you wish to direct is in the ascendant degree, direct it by the ascensions of the signs of the earth, for each degree a full year, for the houses, and for the terms, and for the rays of the serving planets, by way of aspects in parts of hours as I will explain.

[Directing the Seventh House]
And if the place you wish to direct is at the beginning of the seventh house, direct it by opposition, which is the ascendant degree.

[Directing the Tenth and Fourth Houses]
And if it is at the beginning of the tenth house or the beginning of the fourth house, direct it by the ascensions of the equal houses.

[Directing Other Houses]
And if it is not at the beginning of these houses, direct it by mixed ascensions.

[Calculating Directions Between Houses]
And thus you shall do: If the desired point is between the tenth house and the first house. Subtract the ascensions of the tenth house in the sphere of the world from the ascensions of the desired point, and divide the distance by the arc of the distorted hour of the desired place where you calculate the Sun to be, and know the distance of the hours and parts of an hour by true calculation.

[Calculating Directional Distance]
After that, direct the ascensions of the desired point to the place you wish in the ascensions of the sphere of the world, and know the distance between the two ascensions.

[Directional Calculation with Earth Table]
You shall also do this with the table of the earth, from the two desired points, and the directed point, and the beginning of the desired point, and by the method of completing the sphere by way of ascensions.

[Correction in Directional Calculation]
And know the distance, which is one-sixth of the excess you find between the two distances, and what falls on the distance of the hours from the hour, and the result is the correction.

[Comparing Distances for Correction]
And again, see if the distance of the ascensions of the equal sphere is greater than the distance of the table of the earth.

[Subtracting Correction for Degrees]
Subtract the correction from the distance of the equal sphere, and the remainder is the corrected degrees, one year for each degree.

[Adding Correction for Degrees]
And if the distance of the table of the earth is greater than the distance of the equal sphere, add the correction to the distance of the equal sphere, and the sum is the corrected degrees.

[Aspects and Cardinal Points]
a left sextile, then you will undoubtedly find the right trine. (5) A left quartile is always a right quartile, and a left trine is always a right sextile. (6) If the planet is at the beginning of a cardinal point, its two quartile aspects will always be at the beginning of the cardinal points. (7) And when you direct the places of dominion in equal degrees, direct them to the aspects in equal degrees; and when you direct them by the method of rising times, if they are at the beginning of the cardinal points or in mixed rising times, direct them to these aspects, because they have more power than aspects in equal degrees from above.

[Correction of House Cusps]
And the correction of the houses. The beginning of the eleventh and tenth houses should have two distorted hours on the equatorial circle and four hours in the table of the land. (2) And if you take a third of the equal degrees from the beginning of the tenth house to the ascendant degree, you will find approximately the beginning of the eleventh house. (3) And similarly, you shall seek the twelfth house. (4) And in this way, the beginning of the second house, but you must keep the arc of the hour of the opposite, and similarly the beginning of the third. (5) And after you have sought it in equal degrees, you shall do likewise. (6) Take the distorted arc of the hour of the beginning of the eleventh and double it, and add it to the rising times of the equatorial circle at the beginning of the tenth house. (7) And according to the degrees, place this number; thus is the beginning of the eleventh. (8) Also, double the arc of the hour four times and subtract it from the rising times of the ascendant in the table of the land, and at the place where this number comes, you will find the eleventh house. (9) And you shall correct it with a distorted arc of an hour, degree by degree, and you will find the beginning of the eleventh house. (10) And for the twelfth, multiply the arc of the hour four times, and add or subtract from the tenth house.

[Approximate Directions]
If you wish to know the approximate directions, take the rising times of the desired point, and see what is lacking between it and the circle, and similarly, add to the rising times of the degrees to which you directed it. (2) The degrees are like seconds, if you wish to divide. The Judgments of the Zodiacal Signs are completed. Praise be to God, who performs great deeds, and to whom all deeds are attributed.

[Long and Crooked Signs]
Long/short signs, straight/crooked signs.

[Zodiacal Halves: Sun and Moon]
The masters of judgments divided the circle into two, attributing the greater part, which is from the head of Leo to the end of Capricorn, to the Sun, and the smaller part, which is from the end of Capricorn to the head of Leo, to the Moon.

[Fiery, Earthy, Airy, Watery Signs]
The fiery signs... Scorpio, Pisces.

[Masculine and Feminine Signs]
The masculine... Capricorn, Pisces.

[Eastern Signs]
Eastern: Aries... Scorpio, Pisces.

[Strong-Voiced and Half-Voiced Signs]
Strong-voiced... Scorpio, Pisces.

[Social Classes of Signs]
Haughty rulers, middle-class, commoners, lower-class people. Kings, nobles, middle-class, slaves.

[Solitary and Strong Signs]
Solitary: Leo... Leo, Virgo.

[Human-Shaped Signs]
Human shape... also Aquarius.

[Signs Cut Off in Their Limbs]
Cut off (in their limbs)... Taurus and Leo.

[Deformed Signs]
Deformed signs: Aries... Capricorn, Pisces. Deformed signs, signs of diseases.

[Libidinous Signs]
Libidinous (persons)... Leo, Pisces. Signs of lust.

[Handsome Signs]
Handsome (persons)... Sagittarius, Pisces.

[Physician Signs]
Physicians: Taurus, Scorpio.

[[Chunk 80 — Translation Pending]]
[PLACEHOLDER — This section (chunk 80, index/glossary back-matter) failed to translate automatically due to JSON output truncation. The source text is preserved in the 'text' field for manual translation or re-processing.]

[Lord of the Hour]
Lord of the hour.

[Burnt]
Burnt.

[Joy]
Joy.

[Triplicity]
Triplicity.

[Lords of the Triplicity]
The lords of the fiery triplicity.

[The Terms]
The Terms.

[Explanation of the Term Lord]
Explanation: The lord of the term.

[The Ninth-parts]
The ninth-parts.

[The Dodecatemoria]
The dodecatemoria.

[Illustration: the ascendant]
The illustration: the ascendant.

[Importance of Dodecatemoria]
The dodecatemoria are very important.

[Scientists who rely on experience]
Scientists who rely on experience.

[Divisions of the places]
Divisions of the houses.

[Rising times]
Rising times.

[In this location, whose latitude is 50.5°]
In this place, whose latitude is 50.5 degrees.

[The cusps and rising times]
The cusps of the houses and rising times.

[Astrologers]
Astrologers.

[[Chunk 83 — Translation Pending]]
[PLACEHOLDER — This section (chunk 83, index/glossary back-matter) failed to translate automatically due to JSON output truncation. The source text is preserved in the 'text' field for manual translation or re-processing.]

[Saturn's First House and Thighs]
Saturn's first house... (in Aries) is the thighs.

[The Ancients on Planetary Pains]
The Ancients mentioned... seen and found.

[The Planets]
The planets.

[Planetary Power and Perigee]
Observe: if, when... they rise from perigee.

[Lord of the Native]
The lord of the native... I shall explain.

[Ancients' Opinion on Planetary Strength]
The Ancients said... it is not true.

[Planet's Power: Latitude]
A planet has power... neither northern nor southern.

[Eccentric Circle]
Eccentric circle, Hebrew galgal ha-merkaz, literally the circle of the center.

[Ray of a Planet]
Ray, literally 'spark.' This term refers to a number of degrees in the zodiac, ahead of or behind the planet, where its influence is still felt.

[Sun and Upper Planet Conjunction]
Know that the Sun...

[Planet's Power Doubled]
So if the planet... its power is doubled.

[Distance Exceeds 18 Degrees]
But if the distance... exceeds 18°.

[Upper Planets Equal Degrees]
The two upper... equal degrees.

[Retrograde Planet's Role]
Any retrograde planet... passed (opposition).

[Rising Times and Straight Signs]
Short... long rising times... straight signs.

[First Station of a Planet]
First station.

[Between 30 Degrees by Experience]
Between 30°... by experience.

[Ptolemy's Statement]
King Ptolemy says... is correct.

[Planet's Intermediate State]
When it [the planet]... is intermediate.

[Closer Planet, Stronger Power]
But the closer... its power.

[General Rule for Oriental Planets]
This is the general rule... they are oriental.

[Mercury's Elongation from Sun]
Mercury, regardless... from the Sun.

[Tables of Elongation]
Tables.

[True Anomaly]
True anomaly.

[Venus and Mercury Motion]
The motion of Venus... oriental (of the Sun).

[Lower Planets and Sun Conjunction]
The two lower... apogee of its circle.

[Rule for Sun's Motion]
This is a rule... Sun’s motion.

[Astrologers on Lower Planets]
The astrologers said... lower (planets).

[Moon's Power, Cold and Moist]
The power of the Moon... cold and moist.

[Retrogradation Table]
Now I will write... it retrogresses.

[The Conjunction]
The solid sphere whose solidity is...

[The Body and Geometry]
Because Venus... any other planet.

[Planets Governing Conjunctions]
Now if two planets... will conjoin.

[Opposition and Latitude]
But in opposition, the superior... according to latitude.

[Astrological Aspects Defined]
Now I will speak... half love.

[Geometrical Explanation of Aspects]
A circle is bisected... the sixth is 2.

[Jupiter's Aspect Illustration]
Illustration: Jupiter... will not occur.

[Nature of the Planets]
Now I will begin to speak of the nature of the planets.

[The Sun's Astrological Properties]
The Sun.

[Sun Rules Metals, Plants, Creatures]
And it rules over metals, plants, and living creatures.

[Sun and the Human Soul]
And the speaking soul is connected to it.

[Sun: Root of Astrology]
It is the root of the science of the zodiacal signs... born by night.

[Sun Signifies Father]
And the Sun signifies the father for one born by day.

[Sun and Body Parts]
The right eye... side.

[Sun and Gold]
Of the metals, gold is in its portion.

[Moon rules the night]
The Moon rules over the night.

[Moon rules melons, pumpkins, and ocean]
In melons and pumpkins... near the ocean.

[Moon rules brain and bone marrow]
In the brain and in the bone marrow.

[Moon rules body's natural power]
In the power of the body's nature.

[Moon rules left eye by day, right by night]
The left eye... the right one by night.

[Moon portends new beginnings]
It portends everything that a person begins.

[Moon indicates up to 4 years old]
Gives an indication... 4 years old.

[Moon rules silver]
Of metals, silver.

[Moon's power from the west]
Its power comes from the west.

[Moon rules Thursday night to Friday morning]
Of the days of the week... [i.e., between sundown on Thursday and sunrise on Friday].

[Moon rules first fardar period by day]
It rules (the first)... born by day.

[Moon's years: least 25, great 108]
Its least years... great (years) 108.

[Moon signifies mother, sister, wife]
It signifies the native's mother, sister, and wife.

[Moon rules life periods]
The rulers over... during his life.

[Saturn]
Saturn.

[Saturn rules lead]
Lead is in its portion.

[Saturn's taste is sour at apogee]
Its taste is sour... when at apogee.

[Saturn is planet of fear and dread]
It is the planet... fear, and dread.

[Saturn rules spleen and right ear]
In its portion is the spleen... the right ear.

[Saturn rules elderly and paupers]
The elderly and the paupers are in its portion.

[Saturn: Its portion includes demons and melancholy]
Its portion includes demons and black bile.

[Saturn: Chronic diseases and boils]
Chronic diseases... boils are in its portion.

[Saturn: Day of the week]
Of the days of the week... [i.e., between sundown on Tuesday and sunrise on Wednesday].

[Saturn: Rules those born by night for 11 years]
It rules those born by night for 11 years.

[Saturn: Ptolemy's ages of man, old age]
But according to Ptolemy... old age.

[Saturn: Least and great years]
Its least years are 30... great (years) 57.

[Saturn: Direction, west]
Of the sides (of the horizon), west.

[Saturn: Riding animals, donkeys; masculine planet]
Of riding animals, donkeys; it is a masculine planet.

[Jupiter: Ages of man, old age]
Of the ages... old age.

[Jupiter: Its portion includes tin]
In its portion are tin.

[Jupiter: Signifies vegetative soul]
It signifies the power of the vegetative soul.

[Jupiter: Left ear, colors, green]
The left ear... colors, green.

[Jupiter: Power in north, signifies winds]
Its power is in the northern side (of the horizon); it signifies winds.

[Jupiter: Planet of truth, named Sedeq]
In general, it is a planet of truth, so it was named Sedeq.

[Saturn: Always at rest, Shabbetai]
Always at rest.

[Saturn: Called Shabbetai, will be idle]
Saturn is called so... will be idle.

[Jupiter: Day of the week]
Of the days of the week... [i.e., between sundown on Sunday and sunrise on Monday].

[Jupiter: Rules after Saturn for 12 years]
It rules after Saturn... for 12 years.

[Jupiter: Number of years]
This is also the number... (years) 79.

[Jupiter: King Ptolemy's empirical demonstration]
King Ptolemy said... demonstrated empirically.

[Jupiter: Its portion, place of worship]
Its portion... place of worship.

[Mars: Called Ma'adim because it is red]
Mars: it is called so [Ma'adim] because it is red [adom].

[Mars: Signifies phlebotomist, physicians of bruises]
It signifies the phlebotomist... physicians (who dress) bruises.

[Mars: Sheds blood, soon die, fluxes]
It sheds blood... soon die, and fluxes.

[Mars: Iron in its portion]
Iron is in its portion.

[Mars: The right nostril]
The right nostril.

[Mars: Of the colors, red]
Of the colors, red.

[Mars: Direction, south]
Of the sides (of the horizon), south.

[Mars: Choleric soul in its portion]
The choleric soul is in its portion.

[Venus and the Left Nostril]
Venus signifies the left nostril. If, in a diurnal or nocturnal nativity, it is above the Earth, in a malefic aspect with the harmful planets, or combust, it indicates an illness in the left nostril. But if it is below the Earth, it indicates an illness in the organ or in the semen.

[Mercury's Changeable Nature]
This is the planet of wit, wisdom, and understanding, because it is mixed in its nature. Therefore, it quickly changes to any nature because it is temperate, and can be either good or bad.

[Mercury, Soul, and Tongue]
The tongue belongs to it [Mercury], and the superior soul.

[Lot of Fortune]
Lot of Grace

[Lordship of the Decan]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Planetary Power and Dignities]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Planetary Conditions and Relationships]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Lower Planet Giving Power]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Lower Planet Rising to High Rank]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Planet as Lord of the Ascendant]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Fixed, Tropical, and Bicorporal Signs]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Sun as Malefic and Benefic]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Ptolemy on Saturn's Evil]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Astrological Lots]
The good lot, and the lot of grace.

[Lot of the Sun]
The lot of the Sun... words and dreams.

[Lot of the Moon]
The lot of the Moon... fear of God.

[Lot of Saturn]
The lot of Saturn... lost objects.

[Lots of the Places]
I shall also mention the lots of the places.

[Lots of the First Place]
The first place... lord of the house.

[Lots of the Second Place]
The second place... riches and possessions.

[Lots of the Third Place]
The third place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Fourth Place]
The fourth place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Fifth Place]
The fifth place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Sixth Place]
The sixth place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Seventh Place]
The seventh place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Eighth Place]
The eighth place... position of Mercury.

[Lots of the Ninth Place]
The ninth place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Tenth Place]
The tenth place... degree of its exaltation.

[Lots of the Eleventh Place]
The eleventh place... ascendant degree.

[Lots of the Twelfth Place]
The twelfth place... ascendant degree.

[The Directions]
The directions.

[Directing Five Places of Dominion]
You should direct the five places of dominion by two methods.

[Ray of an Aspect]
Ray of an aspect.

[Direction and Ray]
So in the direction... ray.

[Chaldeans and Astrologers]
The Chaldeans are the astrologers... who know future events by their craft; by their knowledge of human nativities, to direct the degrees over the terms and over the aspects of the serving stars and the two luminaries and the cycle of the year, month, week, and day.

[The Terms of the Egyptians]
The terms. These are the terms of the Egyptian sages. And behold, the life of a person is divided according to the terms, and sometimes a person goes from good to good, or from good to bad, or from bad to good, or from bad to bad, according to the nature of the lords of the terms.

[Sphaera Recta]
Planar circle.

[Places of Danger and Diseases]
In the Book of Nativities, I will explain the places of danger and diseases.

[Aspects of the Directions]
The aspects of the directions.

[Long and Short Signs]
Long sign... short sign.

[First Decan of Aries Ascendants]
In the first decan of Aries ascend a woman called Athena, shining and luminous, and the tail of the sea fish called Al-Akar, which is Cetus, and the head of the Triangle, and the head of Al-Tamur, which is the Bull-Stag, and a figure whose head is a dog's head, with a torch in its left hand and a key in its right hand. The Indians said that in this decan ascends a black man with red eyes, a large body, a strong heart, and a strong mind. He wears a large white garment tied in the middle with a rope, and he is angry and standing on his feet, a guardian and protector. And from the forty-eight constellations, according to what agrees with Ptolemy's words, in this decan ascend the back, buttocks, knee, and left hand of the Woman Sitting on the Throne [Cassiopeia], and from the Woman Who Sees No Husband [Andromeda] ascends from the middle of her back to her buttocks, and her thighs, and the hem of her garments, and the second Fish, and part of the Flaxen Thread, and the rear part of Cetus's belly.

[Second Decan of Aries Ascendants]
In the second decan of Aries ascend Andromeda and the middle of this sea fish, which is Al-Akar, and the middle of the Triangle, and the middle of Al-Tamur, which is the Bull-Stag, and half a snake, and a field of grain, and a sea ship, and a horseman with a sword in his hand, and a woman combing her head, and an iron breastplate, and the head of the Demon, which is Algol, and the 'Rma' of Perseus, which is Perseus's sword, and Perseus carrying the head of the Demon, called 'Namas' in Arabic and 'Filsis' in Persian. The Indians said that in this decan ascends a woman wearing red clothes, having one foot, and her figure resembles that of a horse, and she desires to go out and seek clothes, ornaments, and a son.

[Aries Decan 3: Ptolemy's View]
According to Ptolemy's statement, there ascend the chest of Perseus, his left hand in which is the head, the lock of hair which is in the head of Aries, the body of Aries, and the head and hand of Cetus.

[Taurus Decan 1: Indian View]
The Indians maintained that in this decan ascends a man whose face and body are similar to a ram. He has a wife like a bull in shape. His fingers are similar to the cloven hooves of goats. This man is strong in his body, with much heat in his belly and body. He is a glutton and does not stint in his food. He wears a worn garment. He is concerned about building a house, lands, and buildings, and taking out cattle to land for plowing and sowing. There ascends a reversed spiritual figure which lowers a stick with its right hand and lifts the left hand.

[Taurus Decan 1: Ptolemy's View]
According to Ptolemy's statement, there ascend in this decan the knees, shanks, and rear foot of Perseus, the back and hump of the Bull, and the beginning of its foreleg, what accompanies its belly, and its right rear foot, the beginning of the River, and the part of its middle up to approximately its end.

[Taurus Decan 3: Ascending Figures]
The third decan. In the third decan of Taurus there ascend the rear part of the figure whose head is similar to a dog's head, a sleeping man holding a snake, two wagons on which there sits a young man and which are pulled by two horses, and a driver and a goat. The driver controls the goat with his left hand.

[Taurus Decan 3: Indian View]
The Indians maintained that in this decan there ascends a man with white teeth and legs, both of which are long. His teeth stick out between his lips. His color and hair are red. His body is similar to the body of the elephant and lion. His mind is confused. He meditates on evil and sits on a carpet. He wears velvet and is wrapped in black sable. There (also) ascend a northern horse, a dog, and a calf sitting down.

[Gemini Decan 1: Indian View]
The Indians maintained that there ascends in this decan a man in the form of a negro and the color of a griffin whose head is tied with a band of lead; he clothes himself with weapons, and has an iron helmet on his head, a silk-brocaded crown on that helmet and a bow and arrows in his hand; he likes amusement and fun. There ascends with him a garden with many sweet-smelling herbs, a kinnar, which are cymbals to be played. He sings and takes the sweet-smelling herbs from the garden.

[Gemini Decan 1: Ptolemy's View]
According to Ptolemy's statement, there ascend in this decan the right palm of the One Holding the Reins (Auriga), one rear foot of the Bull (Taurus), a hand of the Giant (Orion), and his shoulder, head, chest, belt, foot, knee, and the chest and rump of the Hare (Lepus).

[Gemini Decan 3: Ascending Figures]
In the third decan of Gemini there ascend Apollo on whose head is a turban, and with him a kinnar, which is a stringed instrument, and a golden flute. There ascend a barking dog, Delphinus, which is a sea animal, a panther, the shears of a tailor, and the first half of the Lesser Bear, and the tail of the Horned Snake that is curled at the base of Virgo.

[Sagittarius: Body Parts and Illnesses]
To Sagittarius are the thighs, nevi, birthmarks, additions in the members like fingers, and other surplus members. Its illnesses are like blindness and the loss of an eye. It indicates baldness, falling from high places, injuries from riding animals and beasts of prey, and from paralyzing, extracting, cutting, and the like.

[Signs and Social Status]
The signs indicate the conditions of people in another way, i.e., that Aries and its triplicities are the signs of the kings; Gemini and its triplicities are the signs of nobles and great people; Taurus and its triplicities are the signs of middling people; and Cancer and its triplicities are the signs of lowly people.

[Ptolemy and the Almagest]
There were a number of Greek kings immediately after the Two-Horned, Alexander, son of Philip, each of whom was called Ptolemy, namely ten, nine men and a woman. They lived in Egypt and their rule lasted 275 years. The majority of them were wise, and one of them was Ptolemy, who composed the book of the Almagest on the causes of the motion of the sphere and all the planets within it. Another of them composed a book on astrology and attributed it to Ptolemy, the author of the book of the Almagest. It is sometimes said that the very learned man who wrote the book of astrology also wrote the book of the Almagest.

[Gemini Decan 2: Ptolemy's View]
According to Ptolemy's statement, there ascend in this decan the face of the Greater Bear, the heads of the Twins who are in front and behind, the backside of the front Twin and his hand, the Smaller Dog, the rest of the Greater Dog, the stern of the Ship, and the base of the oar.

[Directions of the Signs]
On the directions of the signs. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius are eastern. Aries is the heart of the east and its wind is the east wind. Leo is on the left side of the east and its wind is the lateral one between the east and the north. Sagittarius is on the right side of the east and its wind is the lateral one between the east and the south. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are southern. Capricorn is the heart of the south and its wind is the south wind. Taurus is on the left side of the south and its wind is the lateral one between the south and the east. Virgo is on the right side of the south and its wind is the lateral one between the south and the west. Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius are western. Libra is the heart of the west and its wind is the west one. Aquarius is on the left side of the west and its wind is the lateral one between the west and the south. Gemini is on the right side of the west and its wind is the lateral one between the west and the north. Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces are northern. Cancer is the heart of the north and its wind is the north wind. Scorpio is on the left side of the north and its wind is the lateral one between the north and the west. Pisces is on the right side of the north and its wind is the lateral one between the north and the east.

[Reason for Lots]
The reason for extracting the lots is clear and obvious to those who have understood the indications of the planets. There are two reasons for this. The first is that when one of the planets comes near to another, and they conjoin each other, or when one of the two separates from the other by more or less than a degree, a mixture and an indication of good or evil other than that indicated at an

[Planets' Good Fortune and Power]
The sixth chapter: on the good fortune of the planets, their power, their weakness, their misfortune, and the corruption of the Moon. The good fortune of the planets is that they are in an aspect of the benefics—either sextile, square, or trine—or they are in conjunction with them, or the malefics are cadent from them, or they are separating from a benefic and applying to a benefic, or they are besieged between two benefics, or in the heart, or in an aspect of the Sun—either trine or sextile—or in an aspect of the Moon while the Moon is fortunate, or they are swift in their motion, increasing in light and number, or they are in their halb, that is, in their houses, exaltations, terms, triplicities, decans, or joys, or in the bright degrees, or received, or they are in their domains, meaning, the masculine (planet) is in a masculine sign and masculine degrees by day above the earth and by night below the earth, or the feminine (planet) is in a feminine sign and feminine degrees by day below the earth and by night above the earth. And when the luminaries are in the shares of the two benefics, then it is as if they are in their own shares. And likewise when the benefics are in the shares of the luminaries.

[Kinds of Good Fortune]
These good fortunes are of three kinds: double good fortune, good fortune, and less than that. Double good fortune is when two or more of these dignities occur to one planet. For example, when Mercury is in Virgo, it indicates two good fortunes: that of the house and that of the exaltation. If it is, in addition, in its term at the same time, it indicates three good fortunes. If the ascendant is Virgo, it has four good fortunes: those of the house, exaltation, term, and joy. Good fortune is when the planet is in its house where its nature is moderate and agrees with it, such as Saturn in Aquarius, Jupiter in Sagittarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Taurus, and the Sun and Moon in their houses. What is less than that in indicating goodness is when the planet is in one of its houses which is opposite to that (condition), such as Saturn in Capricorn, Jupiter in Pisces, Mars in Aries, Venus in Libra, and Mercury in Gemini.

[Planetary Power]
The power of the planets is that they are rising in the north or are northern, or are rising in the orb of their apogee, or in their second station, or leaving the rays of the Sun, or in an angular house or succedent to an angular house, or the three superior (planets) are east of the Sun; if it aspects them with a trine, it is more powerful for them, and that they are in the two masculine quarters; if the Sun is in these quarters or in the masculine signs, then it is powerful also, unless it is in Libra. With regard to the power of the three inferior (planets), it is that they are western or in the two feminine quarters.

[Planetary Weakness and Decrease of Good Fortune]
With regard to the weakness of the planets and their indications of decrease of good fortune, it is that they are slow in their motion, or in their first station, or retrograding; the most harmful retrogression is that of the two inferior planets, especially when, in addition to their retrogression, they are combust. Or the planets are under the rays of the Sun, or in the dark degrees. Or masculine planets are in a feminine sign or in feminine degrees by day below the earth and by night above the earth, or feminine planets are in a masculine sign or in masculine degrees by night below the earth and by day above the earth. Or it is in the sign of its fall, or it is descending in the south or southern, or cadent from an angular house or succedent, or it is in the via combusta, i.e., Libra and Scorpio; the most powerful in that is when it is from the 19th degree of Libra to the third degree of Scorpio, because these (degrees) are the falls of the luminaries. Or it is in opposition to its house, for then it is hostile to its house and in its detriment. Or that it applies to a planet which is retrograding or harmed or in its fall or cadent or retreating, or it is without reception, or it is in its 'absence'; the most powerful in that is when it is void (of course) and not aspected by a benefic or one of the planets which is compatible with it. Or the three superior planets are west of the Sun or in the two feminine quadrants. With regard to the weakness of the Sun, it is that it is in feminine signs or in these two quadrants also, unless it is in the ninth place, because that is its joy. With regard to the weakness of the three inferior planets, it is that they are at the beginning of their easterliness or in the two masculine quadrants.

[Planetary Misfortune]
The misfortune of the planets is that they are in conjunction with the malefics or in their opposition or in their square or their trine or their sextile, or that there is less than a planet's term between them and the malefic, or that they are in the terms of the malefics or in their houses, or that one of the malefics is raised above them in the tenth or eleventh

[Head and Tail Natures]
Some of the ancients said that the Head of the Dragon's nature is to increase. When benefics are with it, it increases their good, and when malefics are with it, it increases their harm. The Tail of the Dragon's nature is to decrease. When benefics are with it, it decreases their good, and when malefics are with it, it decreases their harm. For this reason, most of them said that the Head is benefic with benefics and malefic with malefics, and the Tail is benefic with malefics because it decreases their harm, and malefic with benefics because it decreases their good.

[Natural Application and Separation]
Another kind of application and separation without the planets aspecting is called natural application and separation. The learned astrologers used this only in special conditions of nativities and questions. It is in two ways. The first way is from the nature of the degrees of the signs agreeing in rising times, such as Aries and Pisces, Taurus and Aquarius, Gemini and Capricorn, Cancer and Sagittarius, Leo and Scorpio, and Virgo and Libra. When a planet is in less than 10 degrees of Aries, it is approaching application to the nature of the degree of the planet which is in 20 degrees of Pisces until it completes 10 degrees. Then its application to the nature of the degree of the planet which is in 20 degrees of Pisces is complete, due to the agreement of their degrees in rising times. The second way is from the degrees of the signs agreeing in hours of daylight. The planet which is at the beginning of Leo is in the power of the degree of the planet which is at the end of Taurus. The application of the planet which is in Gemini to the degree of the planet which is in Capricorn, or that in Sagittarius to that in Cancer, or that in Aries to that in Virgo, or that in Libra to that in Pisces, is called natural application by opposition. The application of the planet which is in Gemini to the planet in Cancer, or that in Virgo to that in Libra, or that in Sagittarius to that in Capricorn, or that in Pisces to the degree of the planet in Aries, is called natural application by sextile.

[Eleven Ways the Moon is Corrupted]
The corruption of the Moon is in eleven ways. The first is that it is eclipsed, and the strongest form of this is that it is eclipsed in the sign in which it was in the native's birth chart, or in its trine or quartile. The second is when it is under the Sun's rays, and there are 12 degrees between them, in front or behind. The third is when there are 12 degrees between it and the minute of its opposition as it goes towards its opposition or separates from it. The fourth is when it is with malefics or they aspect it. The fifth is when it is in Saturn's or Mars's dodecatemorion. The sixth is when it is with the Head or the Tail, and there are 12 degrees between it and one of them. The seventh is when it is southern or descending in the south. The eighth is when it is in the via combusta, which is Libra and Scorpio. The ninth is when it is at the end of the signs, because then it is in the terms of the malefics. The tenth is when it is slow in motion, meaning it moves less than its mean motion. The eleventh is when it is in the ninth house from the ascendant.

[Planetary Conditions and Indications]
In this section, we will mention their conditions and their proper indications for things, because each one of them has different conditions in themselves. This is when it is ascending in its apogee or descending in it, or it is in the middle of the circle of this orb, or increasing in motion, in light, and in size, or it is decreasing in it, or it is moderate in motion, in light, and in size, or it is increasing in number or decreasing in it, or it is increasing in calculation or decreasing in it, or it is in its middle way, or it is increasing in motion or decreasing in it, or it is in its mean motion, or it is northern and ascending or descending, or southern and ascending or descending, or it is of many or few degrees in latitude, or it has no latitude, or it is in its own domain, or in a domain other than its own.

[Solitary Motion]
Solitary motion is when a planet separates from application with a planet in conjunction or aspect, and does not apply to a planet as long as it is in its sign.

[Wild Planet]
A "wild" planet is when a planet is in a sign and no planet aspects it at all. When it is like this, it is called "wild." This happens most frequently to the Moon. This kind of application and separation is sometimes used with a planet in solitary motion.

[Translation of Light]
Translation is of two kinds. The first is when a light planet separates from a slow planet and applies to another; then it transfers the nature of the planet it has separated from to the planet it applies to. The second is when a light planet applies to a planet slower than it, and that slow planet applies to another planet; then the slow planet transfers the nature of the light planet to the planet to which it applies.

[Collection of Light]
Collection is when two or more planets apply to one planet and it collects their light and receives their natures.

[Reflecting the Light]
Reflecting the light is of two kinds. The first is that, in the case of the planet or the two planets from which signification is sought, one does not apply to the other nor do they aspect each other, but they aspect or apply to a planet, and the planet which is aspected or applied to, aspects a place on the sphere; then it reflects the light of both of them onto that place it aspects. The second way is that the lords of the ascendant and of the thing do not aspect or are separating. If a planet has moved between them, it reflects the light of one of the two onto the other.

[Prohibition by Conjunction]
Prohibition is of two kinds. The first is by conjunction, which is when three planets are in one sign, but in different degrees, and the heavy planet has the most degrees; then the middle planet prevents the one with the fewest degrees from application with the heavy planet, until it passes it. For example, if Saturn is in the 20th degree of Aries, Mercury in its 15th degree, and Venus in its 10th degree, Mercury prevents Venus from application to Saturn until it passes it; then after that, Venus applies to Saturn.

[Prohibition by Aspect]
The second way of prohibition is by aspect, which is when two planets are in one sign and the light one is applying to the heavy one, and another planet is applying to that heavy one by aspect: then the one which is with it in its sign prevents the aspecting planet and destroys its application when their degrees are the same. When the degrees of the aspecting planet are closer to the application than the degrees of the encountering planet, there is application for the aspecting planet, because it applies to it before the encountering planet.

[Pushing Nature]
Pushing nature is when the planet applies to the lord of the sign in which it is, or to the lord of its exaltation, or of its term, or of its triplicity, or of its decan. It pushes the nature of that planet to it.

[Pushing Power]
Pushing power is if the planet is in its own house or its own exaltation or its own term or its own triplicity or its own decan, and applies.

[Pushing Two Natures]
Pushing two natures is of two kinds. The first is that the planet is in a sign where it has dignity, and it pushes to another planet that also has dignity in that sign. For example, when Venus pushes to Jupiter from Pisces. The second kind is that the planet pushes to a planet that is of its own sect, such as a diurnal planet pushing to a diurnal planet, meaning both are in a diurnal position, or a nocturnal planet pushing to a nocturnal planet, meaning both are in a nocturnal position.

[Pushing Management]
Pushing management is when a planet pushes to another planet from any direction, and it pushes its own management to it. If this is from a sextile or trine and there is reception between them, that pushing is from agreement.

[Returning]
Returning is in two ways. The first is that a planet applies to a planet under the Sun's rays, so it cannot grasp what it had received from it and returns it. The second is that a planet applies to a retrograde planet, so it returns to it what it had received from it, due to its retrogression. Sometimes its returning is with amelioration, and other times it is with corruption. Its returning with amelioration is of three kinds. The first is that the receiver receives the giver. The second is that the giver is direct, and the receiver is combust or retrograde, and both are in an angular or succedent house. The third is that the retrograde or combust receiver is cadent, and the giver is in an angular or succedent house. If they are like this and the management is received by a cadent, combust, or retrograde planet, the matter is corrupted. But whenever the receiver returns to the giver and the giver is in a good position, the matter is ameliorated after corruption.

[Cancellation]
Cancellation is when a planet is applying to another planet, but before it reaches it, it retrogrades away from it and its application is aborted.

[Accident]
Accident is when a light planet has many degrees, another planet is heavier than it and has fewer degrees, and a third planet, lighter than that light planet, aims to apply to the heavy planet. Then the light one with many degrees retrogrades and applies to the heavy one in its retrogression. Then it passes it, and the application of that third planet, which is lighter than the light planet, is to this retrograde planet which is heavier than it, and not to the heavy planet.

[Evasion]
Evasion is when a planet is going towards an application to another planet, but before it reaches it, the planet to which it is applying moves to another sign. When the giver changes sign, one of the planets is closer to it than the other, so its application is to the other planet, and its application to the first planet is aborted.

[Cutting the Light]
Cutting the light is in three ways. The first is that a planet aims to apply to a planet heavier than it, and a planet is in the second sign from that of the light planet, and before the light planet reaches application to the heavy planet, the planet which is in the second sign from it retrogrades, enters its sign and conjoins it. Thus it cuts its light from that planet which was aiming at application to it. When that application indicates the completion of something, and the condition in respect to cutting the light of one from the other is like this, it indicates that a man who does not have any nobility presents himself to the lord of the matter, and he destroys its matter, and cuts him off from success in it. The second is that a light planet is applying to a planet heavier than it, and that planet gives to a heavy planet, but before the light planet reaches the degree of the planet which is heavier than it, that planet applies to the heavy planet and passes it; then the application is of the light planet to the heavy planet and its application to the first is aborted. This indicates that the man will find in his search something which belongs to the indication of the nature of that planet and he aims for it until, when he is about to achieve it, it escapes from him and another thing comes to him. The third way is that a planet applies to a planet other than the lord of the matter, or a planet applies to it and it transfers its light to a planet other than the lord of the matter.

[Favor and Recompense]
Favor and recompense are when a planet is in its fall or detriment and another planet applies to it, or it applies to a planet with which it has friendship, or one of the lords of its triplicities or dignities of its sign, or the giver or receiver has a witness in its own sign; then it pulls it out and brings it out from its fall or detriment. Its favor upon it does not cease until the planet that bestowed favor upon it falls into its fall or detriment, and the other applies to it or it applies to the other and draws it from its fall or detriment. Thus it has fully compensated it for the favor it bestowed upon it. Sometimes the lord of the exaltation of the planet's sign is called the lord of its favor.

[Domain]
Domain is when a masculine planet is above the earth by day and under the earth by night in a masculine sign. If it is feminine, it is when it is above the earth by day and under the earth by night in a feminine sign, except for Mars alone; for it is opposite to what we mentioned. When the planet is in this condition, it is in its domain and is strong in nature, indicating moderation and uprightness. If any of the conditions we mentioned are lacking, it decreases from the nature of moderation, and if it is entirely opposite to this, it is in the opposite of its domain and indicates corruption and the opposite of moderation.

[Reception]
Reception is when a planet applies to another planet from the house of the planet applied to, or from its exaltation, term, triplicity, or decan; then it receives it. Or the planet applies to the planet and the receiver of the application is in the house of the giver or in its other dignities that we have mentioned. The strongest of these is the lord of the house or the exaltation. If the application is to the lord of the term, triplicity, or decan alone, it is weak unless the term and triplicity, or the term and decan, or the triplicity and decan are combined. For that is complete reception. These dignities may also receive the planets by aspect without application, although reception by application is stronger. When one of the two planets is in trine or sextile with the other planet, or they are in two signs that are erect in ascending or in two signs whose length of daylight is the same or in the two signs belonging to one planet, each one of them receives the other because of the agreement in nature of these signs with each other. The benefics receive each other because of the moderation of their natures, but Mars and Saturn receive each other only from conjunction, sextile, or trine.

[Types of Reception]
Reception can be strong, middling, or less than this. Strong reception occurs most frequently to the Moon from the Sun, because it receives it from all the signs, since its light is from it. But the Sun's reception of it from opposition is hostile. When its application to it is from the sign in which it has a dignity, the reception is double: namely, that of nature and that of sign. When Mercury receives a planet from Virgo, this is also a strong reception. The middling reception is that of the planets to each other from house, exaltation, term, triplicity, or decan. If two of these come together or each one of the two receives the other, it is a strong reception. The others that we have mentioned are less than this.

[Saturn's Nature and Influence]
Saturn. I have already mentioned the reason why it is cold and dry. The essence of death is coldness with dryness, therefore it indicates death, sadness, and mourning; and it indicates ancient things because it is a superior planet and its movement is slow.

[Saturn's Associations]
And in its portion is the land of India, for it is the first clime, and the Ethiopians because of their blackness, and the Jews because their sign is Aquarius, which is its house, and the elderly because it is superior, and farmers because the earth is in its portion. Therefore, in its portion of the human body is the spleen, and leather workers and cleaners of latrines, because bile, which is its nature, indicates filth.

[Saturn's Material and Place Associations]
And it indicates lead because it is heavy and has little benefit. And in its portion of the earth are caves and every dark place, because it is the nature of one with black bile to be solitary and not to dwell in an inhabited place.

[Saturn's Animal and Plant Associations]
And it indicates every large animal because it is superior, and ugly because black bile does not create a beautiful form. And the gallnut tree is in its portion because of its nature, and everything that has the taste of death, because it indicates death. And it indicates frost because it causes constriction, and of clothing, every thick garment, because the nature of black bile is thick and it loves only thick things.

[Saturn's Mental and Physical Associations]
And in its portion is thought, because it is superior, and all secret thoughts, and to do evil, and to be angry, and to tempt, because it is harmful, and likewise every laborious craft. And it indicates distant roads because it is superior. And in its portion are the bones, for they are cold and dry and are the essence of the body.

[Saturn and the Seven Gates]
And its portion is the seven gates in the head for the seven servants, which are the eyes for the luminaries, and the ears for Saturn and Jupiter, which are the superior planets, and the nostrils for Mars and Venus, and the tongue with the mouth for Mercury; and all the astrologers have tested this by their hands.

[Saturn's Illnesses and Slowness]
And it indicates madness, for most of it comes from black bile, and also paralysis and leprosy, and it indicates pain in the legs and many illnesses because of its slowness in movement.

[Saturn and Ages of Life]
And it indicates old age, as Ptolemy explained, that the Moon rules for four years, and then Mercury for ten years, and then Venus for eight years, and after it the Sun for nineteen years, and after it Mars for seven years, and after it Jupiter for twelve years, and the end of the years is Saturn; and he brought similar proofs for this from the nature of man.

[Saturn's Directional Strength]
And I have already said that because it is cold, its strength is directed towards the eastern quarter; therefore, they said it is oriental.

[Planetary Hours and Days]
And know that the beginning of days is Sunday; and behold, the astrologers have tested that on this day the Sun has more strength than on other days, and since they always divided the day into twelve hours, they gave the first hour to the Sun, the ruler of the day, and the second hour to Venus, whose sphere is beneath the sphere of the Sun. And concerning this, they said that the ruler of the second hour on Sunday is Venus, and it participates with the Sun, the ruler of the day, for most of its strength is with the other planets. And behold, the eighth hour returns to the Sun, and in this way, Saturday falls to Saturn, and of the nights, Wednesday night.

[Saturn's Years and Dignities]
And regarding its letters and form, I have not seen a reason for it. And the reason for its immense years is that in this number Saturn returns to its place according to the opinion of the sages of India, and the reason for the great years, which are in the calculation of Saturn's bounds in the signs, according to the opinion of the sages of Egypt, and the reason for its small years is that at the end of thirty years it returns close to its first degree, and the reason for the middle years is that they took half of the great years with half of the small years. And the years of the part called Alfradaria were mentioned by the sages of Persia without proof.

[Planetary Orbs and Light]
And the reason for its bodily strength being nine degrees is because of the size of its body, for it is close to the body of Jupiter, and there are none larger than them apart from the Sun. Therefore, they said that the light of the Sun is fifteen degrees before it and also after it, and for the Moon twelve degrees because its light is less than the Sun's. And there is no star that has light in its essence except the Sun. And so they said that the light of Jupiter is nine degrees, like Saturn. And because the body of Mars is smaller than them, it is close to the earth, so they subtracted a degree from it and said that its light is eight degrees, and Venus and Mercury seven degrees. This was the opinion of the ancients, and they tested this and it succeeded for them.

[Sun: Life, Wisdom, Honor, and Fortune]
The Sun signifies life because it is the great luminary, and it is the light for all bodies, metals, plants, and all living creatures. The Greeks say that the human soul is the Sun, therefore it signifies wisdom and honor, which is like the image of a king, and good fortune because it indicates good aspects, and grace. It has half of the great sphere because it is the great luminary. It is masculine because its nature is hot, and it generates heat, and such is the nature of the day. The heart belongs to it, because it is the essence of the body, and it is connected to the heart because of the network on the brain, and it is one of the heart's vessels. It signifies the father, because the Sun is like a father to all plants and living things, therefore the Moon is like a mother, because its light comes from the Sun. The right eye belongs to the Sun, because the body is divided between the two ruling luminaries, and the right side, which is stronger, belongs to the Sun, and the eye, because the light within it resembles the Sun, and it also belongs to males because they are hot, unlike the Moon which is cold. Because the rulership of the night belongs to the Moon, the right eye of males belongs to it because its light is above the Earth, and the Sun signifies the left eye because it is below. Its least years are 19, because in this number the two luminaries conjoin in their mean motion, and this is the cycle of nativities. Its great years are 120, because these are the years of life for all according to nature, and the middle years are a quarter of the great years combined with half of the least years. The reason for the greatest years, according to the Indian sages, is that in this number the luminaries conjoin in their mean motion, and the Sun's mean motion in the Indian tables is not as written in the tables I have compiled for you, but both are correct. Astrologers have found by experience that the Sun has power on the first day; and behold, the first seasonal hour is assigned to the Sun, and the second to Venus, which is lower than it and participates with the Sun because the power belongs to the lord of the day; and since this is so, the beginning of the night of the fifth day is assigned to the Sun, and the one who begins is the officer over the day or the night. The Persian sages mentioned the years of the fardar but gave no reason, and others said it is one-tenth of the Sun's great years. Ptolemy's opinion is 19 years, because of the luminaries. Its nature is hot and dry because it generates heat and dryness, but it is tempered because the essential nature of life is heat with moisture. Its color is white because of the greatness of its light, for light is white. Ptolemy's words, that all actions are its actions, are correct, because the luminaries are the rulers, and their power is according to the reception of each country; thus are the forms of human beings. Some say that he is short in stature, like the lion, and the change in the eye is because it is the great luminary, and since it is a ruler, its power is seen in one eye, and the Moon signifies the other, and his face is round and his mouth is wide, like the lion's.

[Ascendant and Angles: Life, Parents, Wealth]
Abraham said: Because the rising degree, which is below the Earth, is similar to one born from his mother's womb, they therefore said that this sign indicates life and the body, and in questions, it indicates every hidden thought that comes to light. And behold, this is the first angle, and the other two angles always establish it, one being the Midheaven and the other the Imum Coeli; therefore they said that these angles indicate the parents. The ancients said that the fourth house indicates the father, and the tenth indicates the mother. But Ptolemy says the opposite, and the judgment is with the ancients, for it is proper that the sign indicating the mother should be visible. And because the fourth house is not hidden from it, they said it indicates all, and because it is the end of the angles, it indicates the outcome of everything; it also indicates lands and fields. And they said that the tenth house indicates authority and greatness because there is no angle higher than it; it also indicates the craft by which one is known and for which one's name is remembered. And because the seventh house is, in one respect, the opposite of the first house, for one rises and the other sets, they said it indicates the female because she is the opposite of the male. And because its steps are everywhere equal to the steps of the first house, they said it indicates the helpmate of a man, who is similar to him in one respect, and for this reason, this house indicates partners, and because it is in opposition to the first house, it indicates wars. And because the fifth house is in the nature of the first house, for it is a trine aspect and perfect love, it therefore indicates children, food, drink, and clothing, which are necessities for human life. And because the eleventh house is one of the succedent houses, and it is in a sextile aspect to the rising degree, which is half love, it therefore indicates friends; and because of its strength, for it is near an honorable angle, it therefore indicates grace and honor. And because the second house is near the first angle, which indicates life, they therefore said that it is the house of wealth and the house of...

[Eighth House: Death]
The helpers of the native. (12) And because the eighth house is adjacent to the seventh angle, which is the opposite of the first angle and is not connected by aspect, therefore they said it is the house of death. (13) And many said that the lord of the seventh house indicates the death of a person because it is the opposite of life. This is the opinion of Enoch, Doronius, Valens, and the Babylonians, and they are correct.

[Ninth House: Journeys and Wisdom]
(14) And because the ninth house falls from the angle, and when the Sun is there it declines from the line of midheaven, which is an angle, therefore they said it is the house of journeys and indicates one who has fallen from his station; and because wisdom in the soul is like the body of a person who goes from place to place to seek, therefore they said it is the house of wisdom, and also the house of faith, for faith comes from wisdom.

[Third House: Relatives and Close Wisdom]
(15) And likewise, they said about the third house that it also indicates all close wisdom, and because it aspects the ascendant by sextile, they said that it indicates brothers, relatives, and the like.

[Twelfth House: Quarrels, Prison, Animals]
(16) And because the twelfth house is cadent, and it is always different from the nature of the rising sign in its active nature, which is the root, it indicates quarrels, dishonor, and shame; because it is not connected to the ascendant, it indicates prison. And because parts of the rising sign can be in the twelfth house, namely, when the ascendant degree is not at the beginning of a sign, therefore they said it indicates animals that are for human transport.

[Sixth House: Illnesses and Deformities]
(17) And now the sixth house remains, and because it is under the earth, it indicates hidden wars, which are illnesses and deformities.

[Houses: Astrologers' Experience]
(18) And this is the general rule concerning the houses, and the astrologers say that it came to them through experience.

[Triplicities: Andruzagar's Book]
(19) And the words of the lords of the triplicities, which indicate such and such, I have not seen them in any of the books of the ancients, except in the book of Andruzagar ben Zadi Faruk the Jew, and there was no one in his generation like him in astrology, and the sages of Ishmael who came after him acknowledge him.

[Saturn: Qualities and Associations]
(1) Saturn. They divided the orifices of the head among the seven planets, and they gave the right ear to Saturn, the uppermost, because the ears are uppermost, and because it is also higher than Jupiter, they gave the right (ear) to its portion. And the spleen, because Saturn produces black bile, which is cold. (2) And they said about it that it produces cold because it is far from the Earth, and its heat is not in the nature of life, and Jupiter is not like that because it is closer and its body is larger than Saturn's body, therefore its light is great. (3) And some say that Jupiter is hot and moist because it indeed produces light and has a great light; and Mars is red because it is hot, and there is a little blackness in Saturn, and the heat of Venus is slight because its body is small. (4) And they said about Saturn that when it is at the apogee of the solid sphere, it is dry, because when it is close to the Earth, it warms more and produces moisture, even though it does not warm as much as a person needs. (5) And the change in its nature is due to the epicycle, like the Moon.

[Saturn: Diseases and Characteristics]
(6) And it indicates chronic diseases, and the reason for 'chronic' is that no planet moves as slowly as it does, and the quartan fever which is from black bile which is cold, and madness which sometimes comes from cold and moisture, and also leprosy, and facial swelling due to moisture, and blindness because it is the opposite of the luminaries and its image is dark, and desolation of the soul due to black bile. (7) And it indicates the father because it is far from it, and it indicates everything ancient and old, and the reason for the grave is that it indicates lands, because it has the spleen and it restrains the body's strength, and the grave is a place from which a person does not move, and its nature is slow in its movement, and the angel of death because it is the opposite of life.

[Saturn: Professions and Truth]
(8) And the reason why Mars, Venus, and Mercury are lords of crafts is that every craft requires speed, and the nature of Mars is for correction, and the nature of Venus is for understanding, and likewise Mercury. (9) And the reason for a ship's captain or sailor is because it produces much moisture, which is water and seas, and leather workers because their work is with water, and likewise parchment makers, and gravediggers because it indicates dust, therefore the bones belong to it. (10) And it indicates the science of truth because it is uppermost, and it stands on one path because it does not rush in its movement, and it indicates deceitfulness because its nature is varied.

[Saturn: Prison and Physical Traits]
(11) And prison is a place where a person stays, like the grave, and does not leave quickly, and this is the reason for chains and blows with wood and stones, because they are heavy and it is lazy because it is not fast. (12) And its night and day are like the Sun's path. (13) And its small years are thirty, for then it returns close to its first place, and the middle years are half the great years, and half the small years, and the great years are the number of degrees of its bounds in all the signs, and there is no reason for the years of its portion, only experience. (14) Ptolemy indicates old age because it is the last of the planets; and the Moon gives strength to the native, and then Mercury, and this is the true way. (15) And its taste is sour because sour is cold. (16) Tall in stature because it is superior to all the planets, and bearded because it is the opposite of the Moon which indicates the old. (17) And its face is black because of black bile, and thin because of dryness, also its eyes are small and black, and it looks at the ground because of the heaviness of its movement, and speaks little and not quickly because of the length of its movement, and when it gets angry it destroys its soul because it is harmful. (18) And because it is superior, it will conquer.

[Saturn: Animals and Metals]
(19) And it indicates donkeys whose nature is cold, and the Sun indicates horses because they are hot, and the Moon indicates oxen because they are cold and they have dominion of honor in the sign of Taurus. (20) And the Sun indicates gold because its nature is hot and mixed, and there is nothing among all metals like it, just as there is nothing greater than the Sun among the planets, and the Moon indicates silver because it is less than gold and it is cold, and as there is an advantage of the luminaries over the planets, because they are the great luminaries, so for silver and gold over all metals, and Saturn indicates lead because of its heaviness and because it is in the earth. (21) And it is masculine because of its dryness, and among the day stars because its light and heat straighten its nature.

[The Sun's Malefic and Benefic Nature]
The Sun. Abu Ma'shar said: No planet is as malefic as the Sun when it conjoins another planet, for that planet will not retain its power with it, and other malefics cannot do this; but it is very benefic, more than Jupiter and Venus, in trine and sextile aspect, and to the Moon, only, in any aspect.

[The Sun and the Sensitive Soul]
And in its portion is the sensitive soul—this is known in Aristotle's Book on the Soul.

[The Sun's Portions: Climate, Nations, Kings, Gold]
And in its portion is the fourth climate, as its sphere is fourth from Saturn. And among the nations, Edom is in its portion, because their sign is Leo, which is its house. And among human beings, kings, because there is no creation in the world greater or better than it. Therefore, gold and precious stones and everything similar to gold are in its portion.

[The Sun's Portions: Living Things]
And among living things, humans, because the human soul depends on its power; and horses, because it has triplicity in the sign of Sagittarius, where the form of the horse is; and lions, because of its house; and large sheep, because the sign of Aries is the house of its exaltation.

[The Sun's Portions: Wisdom, Laws, Family]
And it has knowledge and understanding because of the power of the soul. And it signifies laws and statutes, like Jupiter; and fathers, because it is the root of all bodies; and middle brothers who are older than the native and resemble the father.

[The Sun's Portions: Body Parts]
And in its portion is the heart, where the spirit resides, and the right eye by day, for it is the source of light, and the brain, where the soul resides, and the entire right half of the body, for they divided the body between the two luminaries and gave the stronger part to it.

[The Sun's Direction and Years]
And among the directions, the East, for there its power begins. And I have mentioned the reason for Sunday. And the reason for its immense years is that in this number, it conjoins with the Moon without any addition or subtraction, according to the Indian sages. And the reason for its great years is that these are the years of natural life. And the reason for its least years is that every nineteen years, the Moon conjoins the Sun, and there will be only a few parts between them, according to the Indian sages. And the reason for the middle years is that they took a quarter of the great years and added it to half of the least years. Thus they said, and thus they tested. And I have mentioned the power of its body.

[Lot of high rank]
Lot of high rank

[Lot of commerce]
Lot of merchandise

[Lot of an action to be carried out]
Lot of an action that needs to be done

[Lot of desires]
Lot of desires

[Lot of the praised]
Lot of the praised

[Lot of the praised]
Lot of the praised

[Lot of the soul's health]
Lot of the soul's health

[Lot of well-being and joy]
Lot of good and joy

[Lot of abundant well-being]
Lot of abundant good

[Lot of hope]
Lot of hope

[Lot of hope]
Lot of hope

[Lot of success]
Lot of success

[Lot of being well-known]
Lot of being known among people

[Lot of being well-known]
Lot of being known among people

[Lot of the years of the Moon]
Lot of the Moon's years

[Lot of enemies according to some]
Lot of enemies according to some

[Lot of enemies according to others]
Lot of enemies according to others

[Lot of enemies]
Lot of enemies

[Lot of found objects]
Lot of found lost objects

[Lot of friends]
Lot of friends

[Lot of necessity]
Lot of necessity

[Lot of virtues]
Lot of virtues

[Lot of companionship]
Lot of companionship

[Lot of the desired object]
Lot of the desired object and wish

[Lot of the sought place]
Lot of the sought place

[Lot of debt]
Lot of debt

[Lot of delay and necessity]
Lot of delay and necessity for what a person needs according to the Syrians

[Lot of delay]
Lot of delay

[Lot of delay and necessity]
Lot of delay and necessity for what a person needs according to the Syrians

[Lot of delay]
Lot of delay

[Lot of people embodied]
Lot of people embodied in their bodies

[Lot of physical deformity]
Lot of physical deformity

[Lot of courage]
Lot of courage

[Lot of courage]
Lot of courage

[Lot of courage]
Lot of courage

[Lot of the planet]
Lot of the planet

[Lot of the power of the body]
Lot of the body's strength

[Lot of the power of the planets]
Lot of the planets' strength

[Lot of the place of joy]
Lot of the place of joy

[Lot of the path of burning]
Lot of the path of burning

[Lot of returning to good fortune]
Lot of returning to good fortune

[Lot of returning]
Lot of returning

[Lot of calculation]
Lot of calculation

[Lot of the result of calculation]
Lot of the result of calculation

[Lot of reception]
Lot of reception

[Lot of the receiver]
Lot of the receiver

[Lot of the received planet]
Lot of the received planet

[Lot of the fourth place]
Lot of the fourth place

[Lot of the square]
Lot of the square

[Lot of prohibition]
Lot of prohibition

[Lot of the servant]
Lot of the servant

[Lot of separation]
Lot of separation

[Lot of conjunction]
Lot of conjunction

[Lot of the revolution of the year]
Lot of the world-year's revolution

[Lot of the revolution of the year]
Lot of the year's revolution

[Lot of the revolution of the year]
Lot of the year's revolution

[Lot of revolution]
Lot of revolution

[Lot of returning to misfortune]
Lot of returning to misfortune

[Lot of the stronger]
Lot of the stronger

[Lot of the stronger in position]
Lot of the stronger in its place

[Lot of station]
Lot of station

[Lot of the south]
Lot of the south

[Lot of slow motion]
Lot of slow motion

[Lot of the size of its body]
Lot of the size of its body

[Lot of the moistness]
Lot of the moistness

[Lot of the night]
Lot of the night

[Lot of Mars]
Lot of Mars

[Lot of the luminaries]
Lot of the luminaries

[Lot of Libra]
Lot of Libra

[Lot of elections]
Lot of elections

[Lot of the aspect of absolute love]
Lot of the aspect of absolute love

[Lot of the aspect of the ray]
Lot of the aspect of the ray

[Lot of the aspect of full antagonism]
Lot of the aspect of full antagonism

[Lot of the aspect of the planets]
Lot of the aspect of the planets

[Lot of the aspect of the planets in the nativity]
Lot of the aspect of the planets in the nativity

[Lot of the aspect of the Moon]
Lot of the aspect of the Moon

[Lot of the aspect of the degrees]
Lot of the aspect of the degrees

[Lot of the aspect of the Sun]
Lot of the aspect of the Sun

[Lot of the aspect of half love]
Lot of the aspect of half love

[Lot of the favorable aspect]
Lot of the favorable aspect

[Lot of the fortunate aspect]
Lot of the fortunate aspect

[Lot of the aspect with a benefic planet]
Lot of the aspect with a benefic planet

[Lot of the opposition aspect]
Lot of the opposition aspect

[Lot of the quartile aspect]
Lot of the quartile aspect

[Lot of the right quartile]
Lot of the right quartile

[Lot of the full right quartile]
Lot of the full right quartile

[Lot of the left quartile]
Lot of the left quartile

[Lot of the left quartile]
Lot of the left quartile

[Lot of the right sextile]
Lot of the right sextile

[Lot of the right sextile]
Lot of the right sextile

[Lot of the left sextile]
Lot of the left sextile

[Lot of the trine]
Lot of the trine

[Lot of the right trine]
Lot of the right trine

[Lot of the left trine]
Lot of the left trine

[Lot of the complete aspect]
Lot of the complete aspect

[Lot of the left aspect]
Lot of the left aspect

[Lot of the sextile]
Lot of the sextile

[Lot of the aspects of the servants]
Lot of the aspects of the servants

[Lot of the aspects of the directions]
Lot of the aspects of the directions

[Lot of the left aspects]
Lot of the left aspects

[Lot of the joined]
Lot of the joined

[Lot of the quick]
Lot of the quick

[Lot of speeding up]
Lot of speeding up in its motion

[Lot of speed]
Lot of speed

[Lot of motion]
Lot of motion

[[Chunk 103 — Translation Pending]]
[PLACEHOLDER — This section (chunk 103, index/glossary back-matter) failed to translate automatically due to JSON output truncation. The source text is preserved in the 'text' field for manual translation or re-processing.]

[[Chunk 104 — Translation Pending]]
[PLACEHOLDER — This section (chunk 104, index/glossary back-matter) failed to translate automatically due to JSON output truncation. The source text is preserved in the 'text' field for manual translation or re-processing.]

[The Nature of the Planets]
Know that every planet has a unique nature. The Sun's nature is hot and dry, and it is masculine by day. The Moon's nature is cold and moist, and it is feminine by night. Saturn's nature is cold and dry, and it is masculine by day. Jupiter's nature is hot and moist, and it is masculine by day. Mars's nature is hot and dry, and it is masculine by night. Venus's nature is cold and moist, and it is feminine by night. Mercury's nature is hot and dry, and it is masculine by day. And Mercury's nature is cold and moist, and it is feminine by night.

[R. Abraham Ibn Ezra in France]
R. Abraham Ibn Ezra in France

[R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in England]
R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in England

[R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in Rome]
R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in Rome

[R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in Lucca, Italy]
R. Abraham Ibn Ezra and his Literary Work in Lucca, Italy

[The History and Culture of the Jews of Rouen in the Middle Ages]
The History and Culture of the Jews of Rouen in the Middle Ages

[Astrology and Biblical Exegesis in Abraham Ibn Ezra’s Thought]
Astrology and Biblical Exegesis in Abraham Ibn Ezra’s Thought

[The History of Hebrew Poetry in Christian Spain and Southern France]
The History of Hebrew Poetry in Christian Spain and Southern France

[Sefer ha-Tequfah: An Unknown Treatise on Anniversary Horoscopy by Abraham Ibn Ezra]
Sefer ha-Tequfah: An Unknown Treatise on Anniversary Horoscopy by Abraham Ibn Ezra

[The Astrological-Astronomical Encyclopedia in MS Paris 1058]
The Astrological-Astronomical Encyclopedia in MS Paris 1058

[Biblical Stars in Medieval Jewish Thought (Tenth-Twelfth Centuries)]
Biblical Stars in Medieval Jewish Thought (Tenth-Twelfth Centuries)

[Al-Farghani on the 48 Ptolemaic Constellations: A Newly Discovered Text in Hebrew Translation]
Al-Farghani on the 48 Ptolemaic Constellations: A Newly Discovered Text in Hebrew Translation

[Gersonides’ Astrology and Abraham Ibn Ezra]
Gersonides’ Astrology and Abraham Ibn Ezra

[Abraham Ibn Ezra’s Scholarly Writings: A Chronological Listing]
Abraham Ibn Ezra’s Scholarly Writings: A Chronological Listing

[Two Hebrew Fragments from Unknown Redactions of Abraham Ibn Ezra's Sefer ha-Mivharim and Sefer ha-Se’elot]
Two Hebrew Fragments from Unknown Redactions of Abraham Ibn Ezra's Sefer ha-Mivharim and Sefer ha-Se’elot

[The Astrological and Calendar Section of the Earliest Mahzor Vitry Manuscript (MS ex-Sassoon 535)]
The Astrological and Calendar Section of the Earliest Mahzor Vitry Manuscript (MS ex-Sassoon 535)

[Conditions of Planets with Respect to Sun]
The conditions of the planets in relation to the Sun, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, including their conjunctions.

[Planetary Prohibition]
Prohibition, 204, 205, 223, 227, 450, 464, 656

[Planetary Reception]
Received, 183, 209, 420, 454, 455. Reception, 197, 209, 211, 227, 420, 426, 454, 455, 535, 620, 650, 656, 660.

[Planetary Retrogradation]
Retrogradation, 508-511, 514-517, 594, 597.

[Planetary Translation]
Translation (planetary), 202, 203, 446.