[Title Page: Astrolabe Usage]
THE USAGE OF BOTH THE PARTICULAR AND UNIVERSAL ASTROLABE. Explained both in the declaration of their parts, and in a faithful and easy exposition of their practice in Astronomy and Geometry. And all accommodated to the small treatises of the Sphere, of the Astrolabe and of the Geometric Square by Dominique Jacquinot, Champenois, by the same means corrected, augmented, and restored to a better order. D. A. L. G. IN PARIS, At Jean Moreau's, Saint Jacques street, at the White Cross. M. DC. XXV. WITH ROYAL PRIVILEGE.

[To the Reader]
TO THE READER. My Reader, Having recognized for a long time that curiosity led many people not only to seek a great quantity of diverse mathematical instruments, but also to wish among several of the same construction and manufacture to be able to find different sizes to have some more portable than others, I have always striven, as far as possible, to satisfy the curiosity of both, and with much effort I have sought out all sorts of instruments to retrieve them from places where they lay useless, and to give them to the public. But recognizing that the number of those made of solid material such as brass, copper, silver, and others is very small, and the price excessive, and furthermore that it is difficult to obtain them, and that they can only be communicated to a few people, I have sought a way to at least partially satisfy all those who would ask me for them, and on this occasion I have gathered what I could find of engraved plates of diverse figures of Mathematical Instruments, such as the Astrolabe, Cylinder, Radiometer, Graphometer, Trigonometer, Horologes, and others, so that by having a large number of copies printed, the thing could be common to all. And with the same intention, seeing that many employed me to procure for them Spheres whose composition and division were not as readily available as they might have desired, to remedy this, I had some engraved on copper plates of different sizes to offer a choice to everyone according to their curiosity. This convenience pleased them so much that they have since wished for similar ones for Astrolabes, which are recognized among mathematical instruments, especially in Astronomy, to easily hold one of the foremost places. But the matter being long and costly, I have for a long time deferred the undertaking until, as if by importunity one had wished to engage me, several asking me for them, finally the desire to serve the public led me to seek the means to be able to give them satisfaction on this subject. And seeing that most of the Astrolabes we have had until now, even those that the late Sieur Danfrie engraved, of which I have all the plates in my possession, are beginning to deviate from the concordance and relation they previously had with the celestial movements, I have decided to have two engraved that are more portable, indeed I dare say that they will be found more accurate and precise in their divisions than many others larger, which will also have this advantage (besides being according to the reformation of the Calendar) that, as I have communicated the calculation to some of my friends sufficiently versed in this science, they will agree precisely with the celestial movements of the present year 1615. So that where most of the others are presently different from the said movements by long years, these two of ours will not differ in anything, and will be able to serve for a number of subsequent years without sensible difference. Which I also hope to finally procure for the said Astrolabes of Danfrie, by augmenting them with some plates, and having a part of them re-engraved anew to make them, at the choice and will of the curious, conform to our two aforesaid ones. But as I desire to serve all, so I have not had the said Astrolabes engraved only for those who already have knowledge of them, but also, and principally, for those who seek and desire to have it. And for this purpose, I had compiled a summary of the particular Usage of the said Astrolabes, which desiring to communicate to them, I judged it appropriate, so as not to oblige them to seek other more ample treatises, to add it to the treatise that Dominique Jacquinot had previously had printed, which having been, by a second impression, although after a review of the whole work, as much soiled and tarnished by new errors, as little clarified in many places, it seemed to me that it could be given back to the public more corrected and more ample: more corrected, especially by removing what the authors of the said second impression had improperly added: and more ample, by explaining what is found most obscure there, and by adding what can serve the subject, and has been omitted by the Author. But it happened to me that, being on the verge of sending it to press, a third impression fell into my hands, corrected and augmented by a certain David Robert, which nevertheless, upon examination, I found in many places similar to the second, and still having many things to reform, of which I judged it appropriate to warn you, as I have done, and you will be able to recognize it in its place, not that it is my aim to simply give you, by this fourth impression, Jacquinot's book either more corrected or more ample: but inasmuch as I will choose it as the briefest on this subject, to add to it and distribute more conveniently what concerns the particular Usage of our small Astrolabes both for Astronomy and Geometry, I believed that it was in your interest, and mine, to note in passing both the old errors followed by the last two impressions, and those that each of them contributed. Besides this, you will find some difference in the order of the propositions that I have arranged in such a way that the subsequent ones are always dependent on the preceding ones, so that, following the natural and necessary order of doctrine, the passage is always made and given from known things to unknown ones. And in the explanation of the said propositions, I have dwelt a little longer than usual, I hope that this length will not be found annoying to those who, little versed in the practice of this noble instrument, will undoubtedly be very pleased that I entertain them a little longer on the operations, to instruct them, and to form them (as this has been my principal aim) by familiar and intelligible discourses, leading them by a smooth and easy path, and guiding them as by the hand to turn them away from the impediments and obstacles they might otherwise often encounter, showing them the inconveniences that often arise, and the means to avoid them. In short, in expounding this double treatise of Astronomy and Geometry (namely of the Astrolabe considered simply as a Planisphere, and of the Geometric Square) I have endeavored to note all the precautions of which I could think, and which must be taken and observed in the practice of both: which no one, that I know of, has yet done, and which I could not do to make myself intelligible to the less advanced, for whom I principally work, except by speaking to them with a somewhat extended discourse, clarified and confirmed by examples. Receive all this in as good a part as you have passionately desired it, and (to my great regret, by the idleness of the engravers, too long awaited) and that with heart and affection it has been offered by me. Jean Moreau, Bookseller.

[Table of Contents]
THE CHAPTERS AND Propositions contained in this present Book.

[Explanation of the Scale Lines]
Explanation of the lines of the said Scale or Square. 26

[Explanation of the Trellis Lines]
Explanation of the lines of the Trellis. 551

[Quantity and Proportion of Measures]
On the quantity and proportion of measures. 158

[Finding Height by Sun's Shadow]
1. Proposition. To find the height of a Tower or other thing by the Sun's shadow. 264. The same with the small geometric Trellis inscribed on the back of small Astrolabes. 354

[Finding Height by Visual Line]
2. Proposition. To know the height of a tower or other thing by the visual line. pag. 175. The same with the small Trellis. 355

[Finding Height Without Astrolabe]
3. Proposition. To find the height of a tower without an Astrolabe with two rules or rods. pag. 179

[Finding Height with a Mirror]
4. Proposition. To find the same height with a mirror. 281

[Another Method for Heights]
5. Proposition. Another document for finding heights. 290

[Heights when Sun is Low]
6. Proposition. To know the heights when the Sun is elevated above our horizon less than 45 degrees. 192. The same with the small Trellis. 346

[Heights when Sun is High]
7. Proposition. To have knowledge of the said heights when the Sun is elevated more than 45 degrees. 197. The same with the small Trellis. 350

[Heights by Visual Line]
8. Proposition. To find the aforesaid heights by the visual line. 300. The same with the small Trellis. 169

[Height of Inaccessible Tower]
9. Proposition. To find the height of a tower which cannot be approached. 306. The same with the small Trellis. 361. Addition. Concerning the distances of the same inaccessible heights. 317. Concerning the distances and heights of inaccessible things whose base is not remarkable, and this by a single station. 324

[Height of Tower on Mountain]
10. Proposition. To know the height of a tower situated on a mountain. 210. The same with the small Trellis. 371

[Measuring Field Length]
11. Proposition. To measure the length of a field or other flat surfaces. 330. The same with the small Trellis. 373. Addition. Concerning the distances and heights of inaccessible things whose base is visible, and this by a single station. 339

[Measuring Depths]
12. and last Proposition. To measure wells, ditches, cisterns and other depressed places whose bottom can be seen and whose width is known. 340. The same with the small Trellis. 366. Table of Chapters & Propositions. Addition. Concerning the measurement of depths without knowledge of the widths, and this from a single station. 377

[Demonstrations of Gnomon Practice]
Demonstrations for the practice and making of the Gnomon or Dimeter scale.

[Dimensions by Single Station]
1. Proposition. Of dimensions made by a single station. pag 69

[Dimensions by Two Stations]
2. Proposition. Of dimensions made by two stations. 372.

[Measuring Inaccessible Height]
Addition. Demonstration of the method for measuring an inaccessible height from a single station. 380

[Treatise on the Material Sphere]
TREATISE ON THE MATERIAL SPHERE, Containing a brief and succinct declaration of the principal circles comprised therein. BECAUSE the Astrolabe, or Planisphere, of which we wish to treat, is nothing other than the celestial sphere placed and described in a flat figure. It is therefore appropriate and necessary in this place to declare and demonstrate the circles described on its surface, together with the distinction of their names and parts: in order to have an easier understanding of what will be said in our Astrolabe. Such is the text of the first impression of D. Jacquinot that the Auditors of the second (which is false and changed inappropriately at the very beginning, as a sample of their ignorance) have altered in many places, and for the most part in the third impression of David Robert. There are three kinds of Planispheres, namely two general or universal ones, and a third particular one of universal planispheres: one is called that of Gemma Frison, the other of Jean de Rojas, not because they were the first Authors or inventors, the thing being much older, but because each of them made a particular treatise of their composition and their use. Such universal Planispheres are always similar, and serve generally for all kinds of places. As for the particular one, it varies as much as one can imagine different horizons in the Sphere, and according to what one may need, because each particular horizon must have its particular Planisphere, which cannot serve other different horizons; And it is of this last kind of Planispheres that the said Astrolabe of Jacquinot is composed, and most of the others such as those of Stöffler, Bassantin, Roebius, Danfrie, and our small ones, to which, to further extend their use, several particular planispheric plates are added to serve several and different horizons. It must therefore be understood that the Heavens have two principal motions: one which is from West through South to East, contrary to the primum mobile, and comprises in itself the motions of both the fixed stars and the seven planets, for this contains eight different motions, which occur in various spaces of time: for the firmament, according to Ptolemy, completes its revolution in 36,000 years, which is one degree in 100 years. And the Sphere of Saturn, which is the next planet to the said firmament, completes its revolution in 30 years, that of Jupiter in 12 years, that of Mars in 1 year, the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, each in 1 year. The Sphere of the Moon in 27 days and 8 hours. This period of Ptolemy concerning the first motion of the fixed stars has since been changed. First reduced by Albategnius to 25,760 years, giving to each degree 66 years. Afterwards, Alphonse increased it to 49,000 years, which some have inappropriately called the great period, or the great Platonic year: But the last and most truthful period is that of Tycho Brahe who limited it to 1541 years and 7/8 of a year, having observed that every 72 years the fixed stars advance according to the order of the signs precisely by 31 seconds, which would be in 100 years 1 degree 15 minutes, and one degree in 70 years 7 months: The periods of the other inferior motions, except that of the Sun, are not considerable either in the composition or in the use of the Astrolabe, and deserve another place than this treatise, as well as the question, whether these two motions of which Jacquinot speaks, are acceptable and admissible in the celestial Spheres, against the reason of Philosophy, which does not admit at the same time two contrary motions in the same subject; therefore we will content ourselves with saying here only, that it being impossible to recognize in the same subject two appearances of contrary motions equal in periods, in time, and in place, it is absolutely necessary in case of inequality, to give to the faster the name and quality of motion; and to the slower the name and quality of simple resistance; if a full bowl of water agitated and turned quickly, is carried at the beginning of a revolution faster than the interior water, which although agitated and as if carried by the motion of the bowl, nevertheless by its resistance seems to take a slower contrary motion, and thus makes appear two contrary motions of different periods, which we note in passing without changing anything of Jacquinot's text, and of the common way of speaking concerning these two appearances of contrary motions. The other motion, which is first, simple, and regular, makes its revolution contrary to the aforesaid, namely from East through South to West: which, although it is proper to the primum mobile, is nevertheless common by accident to all the inferior orbs, notwithstanding their own motion: for they are conducted and revolved each natural day around the world, as is sensibly perceived by the courses of the Sun, and of the Material.

[Celestial Movement and Poles]
The Moon, and other stars, which by this movement rise and set, and make day and night. This movement is universal, and turns the entire celestial machine around two opposite points, which, for this reason, are called the poles of the world. One is named Arctic, or Northern, which is situated in the Septentrion, near the tail of the Little Bear, of which the star closest to us that we see at the end of the two last stars of the Great Bear is commonly called the Pole Star, and by some mariners the North Star, distant however from this Pole by 3 degrees and 14 minutes. The other Pole, opposite to the aforesaid, is named Antarctic or Southern, as much depressed below the Horizon towards the Antipodes as our own is elevated above. Near this, one sees a star of great light and clarity, named Canopus. Between these Poles, the line extended from one to the other, passing through the center of the earth, is called the Axis of the world.

[Treatise on the Sphere]
Treatise on the Sphere. Jacquinot wrote this treatise around 1615, at which time, according to the most accurate calculation of Tycho Brahe, the said Pole Star was at the 11th degree and 17 minutes of Gemini, and therefore the complement of its declination, that is to say, its distance from the Arctic Pole, was then 3 degrees and 43 minutes. And since then, we have observed this distance in the fourth and fifth minute of 1621 to be precisely 2 degrees and 45 minutes. Among other stars closer to the said Antarctic Pole, there is one of similar magnitude and clarity called Achernar at the end of the River Eridanus, which is closer to the said Pole than the said Canopus by about 7 degrees. Or rather, the axle, by analogy to the efficacy of a wheel, which turns around it. This word 'essieu' is French, and the word 'Axe' is Greek, nevertheless both signify the same thing. One must then conceive a circle equidistant from these two Poles, exactly in the middle of the Heavens, which will divide them precisely into two hemispheres. This is the circle described by the Sun when it enters the equinoxes, namely at the first point of Aries or Libra, of the Ecliptic of the first mobile, which will be called the equinoctial circle or equator.

[Equinoctial Circle and Day/Night Equality]
The equinoctial circle is well described by the circumduction of one or the other of the equinoctial points, namely the first points of Aries or Libra of the first mobile, around the aforesaid axis of the world; but not by the circumduction of the Sun, being in one or the other of the said points: inasmuch as, just as the said circle has no width, and is cut in two opposite points by the ecliptic or path of the Sun, of which the declination, near the said intersection, is greatly precipitous and rapidly changing, so also the Sun cannot remain there long enough to describe it visibly, but passes through it in an instant, describing in an entire day a portion of a spiral, and not a circle. Furthermore, the equinoctial is so called because, supposing the Sun makes some stay in it, the nights are made equal to the days, and this throughout the entire earth. The reason for this is that, in whatever situation of the Sphere, if the horizon cuts the said circle, the common section of the two is the diameter of both, passing through the center of the earth, and therefore dividing both into two equal parts, so that the measurement of hours being taken on the said equinoctial, of which half always appears above the horizon, and the other is below, it is necessary that the Sun, being in it, appears describing this upper half for the day in 12 hours, and the other lower half for the night in another 12 equal hours: and from this it follows that, except at the two Poles where their Horizon is parallel to the said equinoctial, this equality of day and night cannot be received, inasmuch as there is no common section that divides the said equinoctial into two equal parts, one for the upper Hemisphere, the other for the lower: But rather the Horizon dividing the ecliptic or circle of the Sun's path into two equal parts, so that for the space of six months they see the Sun above their Horizon in the upper part of the ecliptic, for another six months they lose its light while it is in the lower part of the said ecliptic, except always what the refractions determine otherwise. The equinoctial circle was called by the Greeks 'Isimerinos'.

[Horizon and Terrestrial Divisions]
Furthermore, it is to be considered that some people inhabit under the equinoctial, and others here and there, both towards the Northern and Southern parts. However, in whatever part they inhabit, they always see half of the sky, divided all around the earth by a circle called the horizon, or terminator of sight, of which the upper part that we see is called the superior hemisphere, and the other lower part towards the Antipodes is called the inferior. The said horizon is found in two different ways: namely, the right horizon for those who dwell under the equinoctial; and the oblique for those who inhabit the Septentrional or Austral parts, in which places one of the poles will always be elevated above our horizon, and the other in similar depression in the opposite. These elevations or depressions increase or decrease according to the diverse distance of the regions from the equinoctial, under which there is no latitude, nor elevation of poles, as you will be able to see and understand by the following figure.

[Types of Horizon]
Besides these two differences, a third can be added, and just as the two mentioned derive their denomination from the diverse situation of the Sphere, namely from the right Sphere the right horizon, and from the oblique Sphere the oblique horizon: so since among these two differences of Sphere there is still a third which is called parallel, we can with reason add a third difference of horizon not remarked by the ancients, which we will call the parallel horizon for those who have one or the other of the two poles for their Zenith, and it is called parallel for the same reason that the other two are called right or oblique, namely with regard to the equinoctial: For the right horizon is that whose plane cuts the plane of the equinoctial at right angles, for those who dwell under the said equinoctial, and for whom all the stars rise and set directly: The oblique, that whose plane cuts the plane of the equinoctial obliquely for those who inhabit between the said equinoctial and one or the other of the two poles, for whom the stars rise and set obliquely. Also, the parallel horizon is that whose plane is parallel to the plane of the equinoctial, for those, as has been said, who would be under one or the other of the poles, for with such a horizon the stars move and turn parallelly.

[Sensible and Rational Horizon]
There is another difference or division that the equinoctial and others have not touched upon, namely the sensible or apparent horizon, and the rational or natural horizon; the first is understood to be that space on land or sea that our sight can encompass, circumscribed around the point of our station, which space can be different according to the inequality of the terrestrial surface and according to the diverse height of the eye above it. The second, called the rational or natural horizon, is that which, although it passes through the surface of the earth, and therefore outside the said center, nevertheless, inasmuch as the earth, with respect to most celestial movements, is reputed as a point, it is also estimated to pass through this point as the center of the Sphere, and to cut it into two equal hemispheres.

[Meridian Circle and Zodiac]
Next, the circle passing through the poles of the world, and the zenith (which is the vertical point in the sky situated directly above our head) will be the meridian circle, which in two opposite places intersects the horizon exactly at right angles, and is called the meridian, because it divides each of the hemispheres into two parts, of which the upper part divides the day equally into two, just as the lower part divides the night. Then there is the Zodiac containing the twelve signs of the heavens, namely Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. And each of these is divided into 30 degrees, supposing that a degree is nothing other than one part of the 360 into which the Ecliptic, like all other circles, is commonly divided. Each of these degrees can be subdivided into 60 minutes and other Astronomical fractions. Beneath this Zodiac, the Sun and the other planets continually move contrary to the first mobile, and this Zodiac is cut by the Equinoctial in two places: namely, at the beginning of Aries and Libra, where there is an equal duration of day and night throughout the universal world, of which the half declining from the said equinoctial towards the North, containing the first six signs, is called Northern: the other tending towards the South, Southern, which has a latitude of 23 and a half degrees, which is partly divided by a circle that the Sun describes in the middle, named the path of the Sun; otherwise the Ecliptic, beneath which the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon occur: and it touches the two tropics of Cancer and Capricorn at two opposite points. These tropics are circles described in the sky by the daily movement of the Sun, when it enters the first degree of Capricorn, which marks the beginning of our Winter, or the first degree of Cancer, which is the beginning of Summer, from which things the figure follows.

[Material: Treatise on the Sphere]
Material. ij We have here changed the text of the first impression, which seemed to us a little too obscure, as well as to the authors of the second and third impressions. Nevertheless, it is necessary to distinguish the divisions of the great circles from those of the lesser circles; all are indeed divided into 360 equal parts; but those of the lesser circles are not equal to those of the great circles, so that this equality should only be understood as equality of parts of the same circle. And it will be said below [Material] ij which circles in the Sphere are called great or small.

[Jacquinot's Latitude and Modern Observations]
Jacquinot recognized this latitude as only 23 and a half degrees, following the doctrine of ancient Astronomers: but moderns have assigned 16 degrees to this, convinced by the observations they have made of the movement of the two planets Mars and Venus.

[Solar Year and Calendar Reform]
Here David Robert, author of the third impression, presupposing that Jacquinot had determined the Solar year or the time the Sun takes to describe the said circle or ecliptic as 365 days and 6 hours, makes a long discourse on the subject of calendar reform, but this determination is not Jacquinot's (who contented himself with saying in general at the beginning of this Treatise that the period of the Sun's movement was one year); it was added by those good doctors who had it printed for the second time, who examined it only over a period of four years to find the reason for the intercalary day in each Bissextile year. And although this discussion brings nothing to the knowledge of the circles of the Sphere, which is the sole purpose of this treatise, we will nevertheless say more correctly than Robert that this quantity of 365 days, 6 hours, of which the Julian year is composed, exceeds the mean annual movement of the Sun, which is 365 days, five hours, 49 minutes, 16 seconds, by 10 minutes and 44 seconds, which in 154 years make up one day of difference. Neither the one nor the other is the space of time in which the Sun describes the said ecliptic; for the true space is the quantity of the true tropical or apparent year containing in these times 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 45 seconds, all according to the most accurate calculation of Tycho Brahe.

[Vernal Equinox and David Robert's Error]
We will also add this word, that David Robert is mistaken in saying here that the vernal equinox, at the time of the Council of Nicaea, was on March 20th, for it was on the 21st.

[Zodiac vs. Ecliptic and Tropics]
This must be understood not absolutely of the Zodiac, but only of the Ecliptic, for as regards the other planets, the Zodiac is said to have some width, so according to its said width it cuts the said two tropics each in two different points: But the Ecliptic only touches them each at a single point, one of which is opposite to the other, which the following figure represents better than Jacquinot's; by two hemispheres, in one of which the said Ecliptic touches the Tropic of Cancer, and in the other the Tropic of Capricorn by diametrically opposed points.

[Arctic, Antarctic Circles and Terrestrial Zones]
Material. 17 Consequently, there are two other circles, namely the Arctic, which is described from the pole of the Zodiac around and about the pole of the world, distant from it by 23 and a half degrees. And the Antarctic, which is figured entirely opposite at a similar distance from its pole. And it must be understood that Cosmographers call the four aforementioned circles, together with the equinoctial, parallels, which with the two poles of the world distinguish the entire surface of the earth into five regions called Zones, of which three are intemperate, namely the two extremes towards the poles, due to the great cold caused by the distant removal of the Sun: but the two others enclosed by the hot and the two cold are temperate, due to the participation of the one and the other contrary quality of these three Zones, of which two temperate ones we inhabit one, and the Antipodes the other.

[Zodiacal Poles and Polar Circles]
18 Treatise on the Sphere m The poles of the Zodiac are situated in the Colure of the Solstices, as far distant from the two poles of the world as the arc of the said Colure comprised between the equinoctial and the ecliptic is great, namely 23 degrees 31 minutes, according to the calculation of Tycho Brahe, to which our observations have often been found to conform, so that the said poles of the Zodiac, making a circumvolution around the poles of the world, describe the said two Arctic and Antarctic circles, otherwise called polar.

[Zones and Solar Influence on Temperature]
Material. 19 n The last two impressions have followed the deficiency of the first in the enumeration of the five Zones, for after the exposition of the two intemperate ones (situated between the Arctic and Antarctic polar circles towards one and the other of the poles, cold because of the distant removal of the Sun), it should truly follow, "And the third (that of the middle, near the equinoctial, comprised between the two Tropics, hot because of the proximity of the Sun): But the two others, etc." But it is to be noted that it is neither the absolute vicinity and proximity of the Sun that gives us heat, nor its removal that gives cold, but the directness or obliquity of its rays, so that where the Sun casts its rays more directly, there is the greatest heat, or more obliquely, there is the greatest cold, so that nevertheless time can increase or temper and slow down both. Hence it comes that under the equinoctial, where the Sun passes quickly, although perpendicularly, and stays only for the space of 12 hours above the horizon, the heat is much more temperate than under the Tropics where it stays for some days (hence they took their name from solstice), passing during the said days almost vertically under the meridian above their horizon, and moreover staying longer than the said 12 equinoctial hours by about 40 minutes or two-thirds of an hour. This truth, founded on the reason of Catoptrics, is further confirmed by the report of all those who have breathed both airs and experienced both rays; indeed, even in this our Northern temperate Zone, we experience in Summer 10 Treatise on the Sphere

[Sun's Apogee and Perigee]
When the Sun is at its apogee, it is further from the Earth and less oblique, and present for a longer time, it is much hotter and causes greater heat than in winter, when the Sun is at its perigee, and therefore closer to the Earth and to us, but its ray is more oblique and with less duration.

[Antipodes and Zones]
I will further explain this for the understanding of the word 'antipodes'. Those who inhabit the absolute torrid zone are called by cosmographers 'Asci', meaning 'shadowless', who have their shadows to the East, West, South, and North, and perpendicular, but in different seasons. Under the temperate zones, the inhabitants are those who are called 'Amphiscii', having two differences of shadows, East and West, or North for some, or South for others. Under the frigid zones, the inhabitants are called 'Periscii', who have four differences of shadows in the same day, because their shadow turns around them, from South and West to North, but in terms of habitation, the inhabitants under one zone and the same meridian, but in diametrically opposed points, are called 'Antoeci', who are under two points of the same meridian equidistant from the equinoctial, and therefore have the same length of day and night, but the seasons are contrary. Finally, those who are under the same meridian, but under different hemispheres and zones, and therefore under two diametrically opposed points, are called 'Antipodes' or 'Antichthones', as having the soles of their feet directly opposed, and walking on different parts of the Earth, also directly and diametrically opposed.

[Colures in the Sphere and Astrolabe]
Finally, in the Sphere, two circles named Colures are described, which are not placed on the Astrolabe, and serve in the Sphere only to solidify its parts; nevertheless, they distinguish the four Cardinal points in the Zodiac, namely the two equinoxes with both solstices. The two colures of the Sphere are represented in the Astrolabe by the two lines that intersect at its center, representing one of the poles of the Sphere, and one of which represents the horizon, and the other is perpendicular to it; for this one passes through the Solstices, and the other through the equinoxes. These two circles are called colures, from the Greek word 'kolouros', meaning 'mutilated', 'truncated', and called 'mutilated' because, with respect to any oblique horizon, these two circles are the only ones among all the other movable circles of the Sphere visible on some horizon, of which only the same part always appears above the horizon, and the other part is always hidden below, whereas all the others, though partly visible, by the circumvolution of the Sphere successively manifest all their parts, and finally make themselves known as whole, such are the parallels ascending on some horizon. But to tell the truth, this etymology is not among the most elevated, firstly because for the same reason all the hourly circles should be called colures, and thus there would be more than two colures, and even more so the meridian, of which, as immobile, only one half can appear, and the other is always hidden, and in the said two colures one can observe more than one half of their circle; moreover, under the equinoctial, or in the right Sphere, this reason ceases, and therefore there can be no colures, so that the said two circles passing through the points of the solstices and equinoxes, and intersecting at the poles of the world, should be provided with another name. I would therefore willingly call them 'Circulos Cardinales', as principal and cardinal circles which enclose, and at the same time divide and distinguish the entire Sphere into four principal and cardinal points.

[Eleven Circles of the Material Sphere]
In summary, in the entire Sphere, eleven circles are found, namely seven great circles which always divide the Sphere through the center into two equal parts, such as the equinoctial, the meridian circle, the right and oblique horizon, the two Colures, and the ecliptic. And four other small circles which divide the world into two unequal parts, such as the two Tropics, the Arctic, and the Antarctic circles mentioned above.

[Jacquinot's Eleven Circles Defense]
Here David Robert, where he makes a subtle point to criticize Jacquinot, shows a misunderstanding; but since in his preliminary epistle he himself presented his third edition of Jacquinot, annotated by him, as a piece of his labors judged excellent by many, and desired by a greater number, we believe that he employed his best mathematics and the best of his knowledge, in order to earn the reputation of having knowledge of mathematics, to be considered, as he says, among those pure, elevated, and subtle spirits; and we therefore believe that his criticism of Jacquinot is serious and sincere. It remains for us then to show what procedure he followed not to have well understood this passage, and to say that Jacquinot, with reason, mentioned only eleven circles in the material Sphere, and no more or less, including the right horizon and the oblique horizon as two, even if he had recognized the parallel horizon, inasmuch as making a distinction between the movable great circles of the said Material Sphere and the immovable ones, it is certain that the two colures, the equinoctial, and the Zodiac are movable, and the meridian immovable; but the horizon being able to be considered in two differences, and according to these alone distinctly situated and separated from the said other great circles, namely for the right Sphere, and for the oblique, and that it is not inconvenient, and can be done without confusion in the same Material Sphere, to apply the said two horizons, of which one being immovable, would always represent the right horizon, the two poles of the Sphere remaining fixed and arrested in it, the other being movable and able to incline, could represent the oblique horizon in any proposed Sphere situation, and thus the said Jacquinot could with reason note eleven distinct circles, separated from each other in the said Sphere, namely seven great and four small, and no more or less; for the parallel horizon can only be considered as the same circle and the same plane as the equinoctial, since both are great circles and will have the same Zenith for a pole, and therefore not considerable in the Material Sphere, to increase the number of its circles. As for the multiplicity of horizons and meridians alleged by the said Robert, it is a ridiculous objection, inasmuch as there is indeed a difference between the material sphere (the subject that Jacquinot treats, composed of certain circles, of which the said eleven represent the primum mobile) and the celestial sphere, for in this one, in truth, a great number of meridians can be imagined, with regard to a great number of different horizons, but with regard to a single horizon, all the said meridians would serve only as a single meridian considering the movable celestial Sphere, where they are like hourly circles or longitudes, considering the celestial Sphere fixed by the said horizon, and this is what the said material Sphere represents; but just as under the same meridian one can consider several different horizons and diversely situated with regard to the Poles, namely two right ones, and all the others oblique, so also in the material Sphere.

[Oblique and Right Spheres]
We can have a single mobile oblique horizon for every constitution of an oblique sphere, which can represent, according to its diverse situation, all sorts of different imaginable oblique horizons, not only under the said meridian circle, but generally under all other meridians at the location of the same or equal parallel: and this with regard to the circumvolution of the entire sphere over the said horizon. And for the right sphere, we have an immobile horizon, representing all the right horizons that can be imagined, with regard to the circumvolution of the entire sphere over the said horizon in the said material sphere. And thus for the entire said material sphere, inasmuch as it represents the prime mover to us, we only note the said two circles, namely 7 great and 4 small.

[Sphere Projection onto the Astrolabe]
Furthermore, what has been previously stated and well understood for the reduction of the flat sphere, we will suppose a sphere to be made of wax, or some other soft and flexible material. Then we will place and set the North Pole on some flat surface, compressing the other Pole; Then you will see how the said Poles will meet, and will be joined one with the other at the center of the instrument, so that the right horizon with the meridian circle will fall in straight lines and intersect at right angles at the said center, upon which the two tropics and the Equinoctial will be described in this manner: that is, to properly describe our Northern part of the Sky on the Astrolabe, one causes the Tropic of Capricorn (beyond which nothing is inscribed on the said Astrolabe) to fall next to the limb of the tables: and the Tropic of Cancer, towards the center, describing the equinoctial between them, according to the proportion of their distances of 23 degrees and about 30 minutes, which is the greatest declination of the Sun, both on the South and North side.

[Critique of Astrolabe Terminology]
This discourse on the relationship of the principal circles of the sphere on the Astrolabe, concerning the reasons for the projection of the solid sphere onto a plane, was inadvertently omitted, or perhaps deliberately removed by those who procured the second impression; and I would willingly believe it, since they not only testified in various places that the word planisphere did not please them, but also, in addition to what was said at the beginning of the following treatise, that it was abusively that the Astrolabe was so named. That for lack of being able to understand the reason for this projection, their ignorance led them to remove this passage which could have forced them to embrace and accept this name of planisphere as proper and suitable for the Astrolabe, as we will show hereafter in its place: But with reason we can here complain for Jacquinot of David Robert, who, having by his third impression followed the errors of the second, and consequently passed over this place without recognizing it, took occasion to criticize the said Jacquinot for having named the ecliptic line separately, and the Zodiac separately as being two different circles: which Jacquinot did not do, but in the enumeration he previously made of the great circles of the Sphere, he made mention of the Ecliptic and in the remark he afterwards made of the circles of the said projected Sphere on the Astrolabe, he named the Zodiac described with some fixed stars in a particular table: which words, not being able in any way to adapt to the material Sphere, should have made the said Robert suspect that there was an error in the said second impression and to research the truth rather than accuse and blame the Author without subject, whom we judge to have had better knowledge than him, of the Sphere and of the Astrolabe, both in their composition and in their use.

[The Zodiac and Sphere Reduction]
Finally, there remains the Zodiac which is described with the fixed stars in a particular table (of which we will have a figure in the following treatise) and is mobile to show the proportion of the movements of the Sky, which is applied to the tables of the Astrolabe, where the equinoctial, the meridian, and other circles are described as said above. And in this manner, the solid sphere is reduced to a flat form for the use and observation of Cosmography, in which there are many other descriptions of circles and lines, of which we will treat hereafter. This text has been improperly changed by the second and third impressions, which have castrated and removed what was best in it: namely, the conclusion of the entire preceding treatise on the Sphere, which was only introduced to give knowledge of the principal circles mentioned in the Astrolabe, which are projected from the solid sphere onto the plane of the Astrolabe. Furthermore, for this word Zodiac, we have the most truthful etymology in Julius Pollux, who says, 'Zodiac is a circle in the sky, which is divided into twelve parts, and in which the sun, moon, and planets move.'

[Second Treatise: Astrolabe Description]
SECOND TREATISE CONTAINING A brief declaration of the parts of the Astrolabe. After having succinctly declared the Material Sphere, it is necessary to explain the names and parts contained in the Astrolabe, to more easily understand its use. And following the doctrine of good Authors, we will begin with the definition.

[Definition and Etymology of Astrolabe]
The Astrolabe is a flat and round instrument, composed of several lines, both straight and circular, for knowing and examining the movements of the heavens, stars, and other things pertaining to the science of Astrology and Geometry, called by some a Planisphere, that is to say, the solid Sphere placed and extended in flat form, and is derived from this Greek name 'Astro', meaning in French 'Star' or 'Constellation', and 'Labio', which means 'handle' or 'grip', as if the handle of the Stars, for by holding this instrument by its handle, we observe the movements of the Stars, and dimensions of bodies; Or otherwise it is derived from the Greek verb 'Astrolabein', which means 'to comprehend', because by it we examine and know the movements of the heavens, and make other astronomical observations: Its invention some have attributed to Messahalach, others to Ptolemy, although long before it had been invented by Abraham, or by one named Lab, from whom some have wished to derive this name Astrolabe, as from the first Author.

[Jacquinot's Astrolabe Definition]
Jacquinot in this place followed the common usage both in the definition of the Astrolabe and in the derivation of its name. The Astrolabe is an instrument composed of a solid in the form of a disk, flat and round, having two parallel planes or faces on which, with the aid of the projection of the solid Sphere, it takes a flat figure. Such is the Astrolabe of Gemma Frisius, which he calls the Universal Astrolabe, inasmuch as on the back he has placed the universal planisphere, and on the face, within the mater, the particular planispheres found in common Astrolabes, which on this single side only, namely in the said mater, commonly contain the said projection of the Sphere in a plane, but on the back they are greatly diversified from one another.

[Astrolabe Name and Purpose]
In which it is to be noted that as this instrument was particularly destined for Astronomy, and is also for the most part composed of planispheric plates serving for the knowledge of the movement of the stars, so it has deservedly borne the name of Astrolabe: The Astrolabe is an instrument which contains and comprehends the knowledge of the Stars and their movements; thus its name carries its definition and its origin, and therefore ridiculous is that which this Author and others report from 'Anse' or 'Labio', which signifies handle or grip, and from the name of Lab, the supposed first inventor.

[Astrolabe as Planisphere]
There is therefore no abuse (as these good doctors say in their second and third impressions, contrary to Jacquinot's text) in calling the Astrolabe a planisphere, since it only comprehends the movement of the stars insofar as it contains within itself the Sphere reduced to a plane. Also, this name of planisphere was given to it by the Prince of Astronomers himself, Ptolemy, in his particular treatise that he composed on it, from which our common Astrolabes, without doubt, first drew their origin, just as later the universal astrolabe of Rojas came from another treatise on the Analemma by the same Ptolemy.

[Parts of the Astrolabe]
Therefore, in order to have a more ample and easy understanding of the said Astrolabe, we will now declare the names and parts contained therein. First, there is the Armilla or ring, or rather the handle, by which we hang the Astrolabe to take the heights of the Sun and stars, and to make other observations.

[The Astrolabe's Faces]
Afterwards is the Astrolabe itself, in a flat and round form (as we have said), which has two faces or surfaces, namely, the anterior, otherwise called the mother, because it can contain in its concavity several tables, serving for diverse elevations of the Pole above the horizon, of which we will speak hereafter. Here Jacquinot, by separately naming the Armilla with its handle and the Astrolabe, recognizes that the handle is not of the essence of the Astrolabe, and therefore there is no appearance in saying that the Astrolabe takes its name from its handle, which is only a part of the Armilla.

[The Dorsum (Back) of the Astrolabe]
And the posterior is called the dorsum, the declaration of which follows. On it are several lines and circles, the first of which are near the margin, containing the degrees of altitude, which have two functions: for by referring them to the numbers written near the extremity of the instrument, where the number does not exceed 90 degrees, they represent the degrees of heights, to know how much the Sun or the stars are elevated above our horizon, and other conveniences; but by addressing them to the numbers described below, which proceed from 30 to 30, they denote the degrees of the 12 signs of the Zodiac where they are described with their names and characters, to find the true place of the Sun each day.

[Months and Zodiacal Circles]
Afterwards come other circles where the twelve months of the year are described, corresponding to the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and their days, each divided separately, or by two and two with their numbers of 5 by 5, or 10 by 10, not exceeding nevertheless 31 days, which is the quantity of the largest month according to Roman computation, by which one knows each day in what degree and sign of the Zodiac the Sun is.

[Meridian Line and Horizon]
Consequently, there are two diametrical lines which intersect at the center of the Astrolabe at right angles. One is called the Meridian Line, which descends from the ring through the said center downwards, the other beginning in the East through the center tending to the West, which universally represents the horizon to us: at the extremities of which the degrees and numbers of the aforesaid heights begin indifferently.

[Unequal Hours and Altimeter Scale]
And near this line are, on some Astrolabes, six small lines in the manner of arcs which all join at the center with the said horizon, described on one or both sides to find the unequal hours: although they are not very necessary in this place, inasmuch as they can be practiced more justly by the description of these, which is done under the horizon in the tables of the Regions, unless they are general for all elevations of the pole to be used where some table would be needed. Moreover, these lines in the manner of arcs are truly arcs and portions of circles described from different centers and semi-diameters. Similarly, there is a Geometrical square, called the Altimeter scale, divided on two sides, each into 12 points or equal parts, of which we will speak amply in the last treatise.

[Winds and Alidade]
Furthermore, we have described on our Astrolabe above the degrees of heights on the edge of the instrument the 12 winds, in order to know from which part of the world each wind proceeds, with a banner, and a small quadrant and needle, as we will say within. We have added this description and figure of the 12 winds so as not to change anything from Jacquinot's text, but we have put nothing of it in our small Astrolabe, to avoid confusion, also because the practice of winds on the Astrolabe is of little fruit. And finally, there is the rule which turns on the dorsum of the Astrolabe, called Alidade in Arabic, or Dioptra in Greek, and Mediclinum or Radius in Latin: in which there are two tablets, otherwise called Pinnules, pierced with two small holes or slits to take the height of the Sun and stars and make other observations.

[The Limb (Mother) and Degrees]
The Names of the Parts of the other face called the Mother. First, on this face is the circuit, called the limb or margin, divided into 360 degrees, with numbers commonly increasing by five by five, and distinguished by lines longer than those of the degrees, which numbers we have continued up to 360, and not by 90, beginning at the direct horizon in the Eastern part, and this to find more easily the ascensions of the signs and stars (as you will see hereafter). These circles and degrees represent the Equinoctial where the 24 equal hours are measured and distributed, which we call clock hours, of which each contains 15 degrees, and each of the said degrees is worth 4 minutes, so that each hour is composed of 60 minutes.

[Critique of David Robert's Divisions]
Here David Robert takes issue with the fact that although the auditor says he has divided the limb into 360 parts of the same sequence and continuous division, nevertheless the figures show nothing of it and are divided by four times 90: but he has only seen figures supposed in the second Impression that his Authors borrowed from Stoeffler and not Jacquinot's original figures; and therefore one should not be surprised if in the said second Impression, as also in the third of the said Robert, there is something in the figures that does not correspond to the discourse and vice versa. This has led us to trace and engrave new figures both to represent Jacquinot's originals, where we have judged them good, and to correct them where we have found them faulty, as particularly in this place where we have seen the continuous division of 360 degrees begin in the East and pass through the South to the West, as Jacquinot's text states, which on the contrary should begin at the direct horizon on the West side, and pass through the South to the East, according to the natural sequence of the signs, to serve promptly for the knowledge of the right ascensions, in the absence of which, in the use and practice of the said right ascensions, it will always be necessary to count by continuous addition of degrees starting, as said, from the true point of the West and not of the East, as David Robert has noted, as little understood in this as in the division of the equinoctial circle, which he says here by a rich consequence, is divided into 360 degrees, inasmuch as there are 24 hours in the day.

[The Concave Interior and Tables]
Then follows the concave interior of the astrolabe, designed to hold several tables or tympans, serving diverse regions according to the variety of latitudes or elevations of the pole above the horizon. On the center of these tables are described three concentric circles, of which the smallest, towards the center, is the Tropic of Cancer, named in the Sphere the Summer Tropic; and the middle circle represents the equinoctial, which passes through the beginning of Aries and Libra, where the equation of day to night is made throughout the entire world when the Sun passes through it: namely, around March 10th and September 13th in our time. Consequently, the largest of the aforementioned circles, near the edge of the tables, is the Tropic of Capricorn (beyond which nothing is described on the tables), named in the Sphere the Winter Tropic, which causes us the shortest day of the year around December 12th.

[Sun's Entry into Tropics and Equinoxes]
The Sun, in these times since the reformation of the Calendar, enters these four principal points: the Tropic of Cancer on June 21st, the Tropic of Capricorn on December 21st, and the two equinoxes on March 20th and September 23rd.

[Equinoctial and Tropics on the Horizon]
It must be understood that the aforementioned equinoctial and Tropics on the oblique horizon, both towards the East and towards the West, distinguish three memorable points: namely, the equinoctial in the Eastern part, the true East; the Tropic of Cancer, the Summer East; the Tropic of Capricorn, the Winter East.

[Corresponding Western Points]
Similarly, they denote three similar Western points in the opposite part.

[Points of the Astrolabe]
A. represents the Winter East. B. its West. C. represents the true East or equinoctial. D. its West. E. the Summer East. F. its West.

[Almucantaraths and Hemispheres]
Also on these tables are the Almucantaraths, or circles of altitude, which are described above our hemisphere, some of which are complete and others imperfect. The first of these represents the oblique horizon, which divides the world into two hemispheres, one of which is manifest to us, and the other hidden beneath the earth towards the Antipodes.

[Zenith and Almucantarath Degrees]
It must be noted that the Zenith of a region is the pole of its horizon for which the table is drawn, and it is understood by the center of the smallest Almucantarath; for between them, from the horizon up to the said Zenith on all sides, are comprised 90 degrees, divided and traced by 2s, 3s, 5s, or 10s, according to the capacity of the instrument and the interval of these Almucantaraths, which are made to apply the Sun or the fixed stars at any hour one takes their altitudes above the horizon.

[David Robert's Useless Remarks]
Throughout this, David Robert preferred to say something useless rather than nothing at all, particularly on this true maxim, that every Zenith of a region is the Pole of its horizon. He gives us for conception a very lofty and elevated idea, that a beautiful consequence can be drawn from it, namely that there is an equal distance from each Zenith to the equinoctial as from the Pole of the world to the horizon: as if this truth were the only, or at least the most eminent, that could be drawn from the aforesaid maxim. But we could add others more important, such as to say that since the Zenith is the Pole of the horizon, it is at the point of the common intersection of all vertical circles; inasmuch as every great circle that cuts another at right angles has within itself the Pole of the one it cuts, and since every Pole is equidistant in all parts from its great circle by a quarter of it, the Zenith of each place divides into two the apparent halves above the horizon, both of the meridian circle and of all other vertical circles; and therefore, as our author says, it is distant on all sides from the horizon by 90 degrees, or by a quarter of a circle. But the Pole of the world also being distant from the equinoctial by 90 degrees, or a quarter of a circle, it follows that, as much as the said Pole of the world withdraws from the Zenith and inclines towards the horizon, so much the said equinoctial withdraws and rises above the same horizon; and as much as the said Pole inclines and approaches the horizon, so much the equinoctial approaches and inclines to the Zenith. Refer to the first figures on the preceding treatise of the Sphere.

[Azimuths and Vertical Circles]
Similarly, on these tables is another kind of imperfect circles called Azimuths by the Arabs, which pass through our Zenith, from which they can be named vertical circles, which intersect and divide each Almucantarath into 360 degrees, described by 5s, 10s, or 15s, according to the capacity and size of various instruments; and this by four quadrants, each of 90 degrees, which are distinguished from one another by two principal Azimuths, namely the meridian line and the equinoctial Azimuth which passes from the true East through our Zenith to the true West, where we commonly begin to count the degrees of the said quadrants, drawing towards South or North, which are made to know in what part of the world the Sun and stars are found, both rising and setting, and at other hours one desires.

[Equinoctial Azimuth and Prime Vertical]
This circle, which our Author calls the equinoctial Azimuth, is what is called the prime vertical, or first and principal vertical, passing through the equinoctial regions, or points of common section of the equinoctial with the horizon, and through the Zenith. In the authors of Gnomonics, it is called verticalis primarius, to which any plane perpendicular to the horizon and facing directly South or North is said to be analogous, and this circle is represented whole, but dotted, in our figure and serves with the dotted lines to show the method of construction, which we have also observed in the preceding figure.

[Unequal Hours and Planetary Hours]
Afterwards, below and outside the oblique horizon, are the unequal hours, otherwise called planetary hours, comprised by 12 small arcs, which, with the midnight line and the said horizon, both in the Eastern and Western parts, distinguish the 12 unequal hours, and have their beginning in the Western part, tending to the midnight line, ending in the East: as you can see by their numbers described below the said horizon in the following figure.

[Names and Characters of Planets]
The names and characters of the seven Planets, according to their order, are figured in this manner: 1. Saturn. 2. Jupiter. 3. Mars. 4. The Sun. 5. Venus. 6. Mercury. 7. The Moon.

[Unequal Hours and Their Description]
The commencement of the numbering of these unequal hours is in the western part, because the said hours are described in the lower hemisphere, below the horizon. Nevertheless, they serve as much as if they were inscribed in the upper hemisphere, in which case their numbering would begin in the East, to then come to an end and terminate in the western part by the middle. But inasmuch as in this case, two of the said unequal hours, equal among themselves, would always be found diametrically opposed, and by knowing one, the other could not be ignored, to avoid the confusion that would arise in the description of the said hours in the upper hemisphere due to several other circles or portions described therein, it has been found more appropriate to describe them only in the lower hemisphere. And it should always be noted that the aforementioned arcs of unequal hours, commonly described by the division points into 12 equal parts of the equinoctial circle and of the two tropics, cannot serve precisely for the intermediate parallels, as for the said equinoctial and Tropics, but only approximately and with an almost imperceptible difference. And to have the said unequal hours precise for the entire length of the year, that is to say for all the parallels of the Sun, it would be necessary to trace the said parallels, and divide each into equal parts, or at least half below the oblique horizon into 6 parts for each division point, and trace a curved line, in the manner that lines are traced for hours on the Cylinder.

[Twilight Line and Stöffler's Error]
You will also find described below the said oblique horizon, a line named crepuscular (twilight) between the unequal hours, denoted by these two letters A and B, to find the point of day and the beginning of night, as we will say hereafter in our Canons. This crepuscular line, marked by Jacquinot in the preceding figure, has been marked and described by us in the following figure below the oblique horizon between the arcs of the 12 houses. And we will note here in passing that in most Astrolabes, this line is poorly described. Stöffler having made the first mistake, has been followed by all the others who imitated him (as most of those who have written on this subject have only imitated Stöffler and not reasoned, invented, constructed, and described by themselves). Those who understand well the projection of the Sphere will easily recognize Stöffler's error in the description of the arc that represents this line. In a word, its description is such that of the Almucantarats, it is nothing other than the 18th Almucantarat or circle of 18 degrees of depression below the horizon.

[Meridian and Horizon Lines]
Similarly, there are two diametrical lines that intersect at the center of the said tables. One is called the meridian line, descending from the ring through the center downwards, of which the part comprised above the oblique horizon represents the meridian line, just as the other part below represents the nadir line. And the other line, which cuts the meridian perpendicularly through the center at right angles, denotes the right horizon, that is, for those who live under the equinoctial, of which the part from the center towards the left hand of the observer of the Astrolabe is the Eastern line, the other part is that of the West. And these lines divide the tropics with the equinoctial into four equal quarters.

[The Twelve Houses of the Heavens]
Furthermore, four great arcs are described, touching the circle of Capricorn at their extremities, which pass through the point where the meridian and the oblique horizon intersect. And with these, they divide the equator into 12 equal parts, in the same way that both the upper and lower parts of the tables are distinguished and divided by them, each into 6 parts or intervals, which represent to us the 12 houses of the Heavens, added for more easily casting and erecting Astronomical figures at all hours according to Urbach and Regiomontanus, of which the first house begins in the Eastern part of the oblique horizon, up to an interval of 50 degrees in the equinoctial, or where the second begins, and so on for the other houses according to the order of the signs. And the first six of these are below the horizon, and the other six above in our hemisphere.

[House Division Methods]
This division of the 12 houses, which our author attributes to Regiomontanus, which he followed and called rational, dividing both the upper and lower part of the equinoctial (extending above and below each proposed horizon) each into six equal parts. There are five methods noted, of which there is only one, besides the one above, which could conveniently be marked on the said horizontal or particular plates of the Astrolabes, namely that which, in my opinion, was most appropriately invented and followed by Campanus and Gazulus, and which divides the first vertical circle (or that which passes from one point of an equinox through the Zenith to the other equinox) into 12 equal parts by circles, intersecting at the points of common section of the meridian circle with the horizon. The three other methods are more bizarre, inasmuch as just as the constitution of the Sky varies from day to day and at every hour of the day, so it would be difficult to make a description on the Astrolabe that could be general, that is to say, serve every day and at all hours of the day like the two above. Of these three, nevertheless, there is a first and older one, which although it does not have its own proper and particular circles on the Astrolabe, can nevertheless be easily practiced on it, as the author will show hereafter in proportion 41.

[The Rete and Fixed Stars]
After having declared the parts of the tables, follows the Rete of the Zodiac, which is a table described separately, and universal for each of the said tables, containing first a circle, where are the names of the 12 celestial signs, divided into 360 degrees by their numbers proceeding by 5s or by 10s up to 30, which is the quantity of one of the 12 signs, and the circumference of this circle represents to us the ecliptic, or path of the Sun. The said Rete also contains a certain number of the brightest and most shining stars in the Sky, situated and calculated according to their true places, on small points, with their nature and magnitude, denoted by certain numbers and characters, namely 1, 2, 3, etc., which signify these stars to be of the first, second, or third magnitude. And by these characters of the planets, Jupiter, Venus, Mars, Mercury, and Saturn, and so on for the others.

[The Index or Ostensor]
Consequently, there is the small ruler named Index or Ostensor, which turns on the center of the instrument around the limb, to show the rising and setting of the Sun and the Stars, and to serve for other conveniences.

[The Central Pin and Poles]
Finally, there is the central hole of the Rete, just as there is in each of the said tables, which represents to us the poles of the world, by which hole and the central pin the said tables are joined together with the whole instrument. This will be the end of the names of the parts contained in this present instrument, which being well understood, it will be easy to comprehend what will be said hereafter in our Canons.

[Brief Description of Astrolabe Parts]
HERE FOLLOWS A BRIEF DESCRIPTION of the parts of our small Astrolabes, the knowledge of which will greatly facilitate their use.

[Astrolabe Back Divisions]
On the back of our Astrolabes, towards the extremities, we have had three types of divisions engraved. The first, closest to the edge, is divided into four times 90, making a total of 360 parts or degrees. It is arranged so that it can serve both for the ordinary division of the circle (horizontally, to obtain azimuthal differences when the Astrolabe is placed flat, parallel to the horizon; and vertically, to take heights when the Astrolabe is fixed or hanging freely perpendicular to the horizon), and for the division of the Zodiac into its twelve signs and their 30 degrees, even half-degrees, as in the largest, where each of the said 360 degrees is further subdivided into two.

[Months and Days Division]
The second closest division is that of the months of the year and their days, arranged in such a way that it maintains a similar correspondence with the degrees of the Zodiac, as the months and days will with the movement of the Sun precisely in the coming year 1625, but a few years before or after, without any sensible difference.

[Sun's Declination Division]
The third and inner division is that of the Sun's declination, distributed to each degree of the Zodiac or day of the year, starting from either equinox and ending at the solstices, according to how far the Sun is found from the equinoctial at that degree or day. And although this division is only placed in the upper part of our Astrolabes, opposite the middle of the Zodiac, it can nevertheless serve as much as if it were continued along the entire Zodiac, as will be shown hereafter in its use on proposition 29.

[Geometric Quadrant]
Besides the aforesaid divisions, and in the middle space of the back of our Astrolabes, we have had the Geometric Quadrant engraved, which we have had divided into 100 equal parts, this division being more suitable for the promptness of operation than any other, as will also be shown hereafter in its place.

[Geometric Trellis]
Below this Geometric Quadrant, on one side, we have had a kind of division made in the form of a trellis by small equal squares, distinguished by tens and hundreds, and with small dots or points, the use of which, as pleasant as it is prompt and easy in the rule of three, even for those who are entirely ignorant of Arithmetic, will be placed hereafter in its place under the name of the Geometric or Proportional Trellis.

[Bimback Quadrant]
On the other side is figured a small rectilinear clock, commonly called the bimback quadrant, which we have added to facilitate the knowledge of equal hours of the day by means of the Sun, for those who find the ordinary inquiry too long and tedious. We will show this in its place, where, inasmuch as such clocks are easy to describe and portable, we have wished to include in passing something of their use.

[Mother Plate Divisions]
On the side of the mother of our Astrolabes, we have had engraved on the edge or limb the ordinary division of the circle, namely, in the larger one, four times 90 degrees, starting from either side of the right horizon, and in the smaller one, 360 degrees, starting and ending in the Western part of the said right horizon, to which, distinguished by a space of 15 by 15 degrees, are added the characters of the equal hours of the day, numbering two times 12, to serve for the knowledge of the said hours.

[Multiple Plates and Universal Planisphere]
Inside the said mother, we have had several differently engraved plates placed, to serve for various uses and in various and different places, such as for some principal cities: Paris, Lyon, Rome, Antwerp, and others, as indicated on each of the said plates. Among these, we have added a universal planispheric plate, figured hereafter, for the curiosity of those who desire to have a general knowledge of what they can learn separately from the particular plates.

[Rete and Fixed Stars]
Upon all these immobile plates is added the mobile Rete, with its Zodiac, to which we have had several of the most apparent Fixed Stars attached, with the mark of their magnitude and the character of the Planets whose nature they partake, situated according to their true and proper place computed for the said coming year 1625, from which they can now differ only insensibly. The rest of the composition of our Astrolabes differs in nothing from what is contained in Jacquinot's treatise on the declaration of its parts; so that, being each accompanied by its armilla and its two ordinary alidades, namely the dioptric on the back and the index (otherwise simply called a rule) on the mother (which armillae and alidades we will endeavor to make just and suitable), we promise ourselves that their use, as will be deduced hereafter, will give satisfaction to everyone, and this all the more because the operation will be found much more accurate than with previous printed ones, however larger they may be.

[Universal Planispheric Plate Explanation]
Explanation of the Universal Planispheric Plate. Inasmuch as the greater part of the ordinary operations in the practice and use of common Astrolabes can be easily resolved in practice and use of this universal planispheric plate that we have inserted with the particular plates in the mother of our Astrolabes, we have deemed it appropriate to add something further to serve as an explanation of what is engraved on the said plate, in order to facilitate the knowledge of its use.

[Planispheric Plate Composition]
This universal planispheric plate is composed of a single circle filled with various portions of other circles described from various centers, all of which portions nevertheless represent semicircles, but differently. For those that concur and intersect all at two opposite points represent halves of great circles, and the others that do not intersect each other, but cut the preceding ones, and terminate on both sides at the said great circle that encloses them all, indeed represent halves of circles, but of smaller circles and of different diameters, some larger and others smaller.

[Meridian, Poles, and Equinoctial]
The great circle that encloses the others, which you see divided into four times 90, represents principally the meridian. The two opposite points of the said great circle, where all the said portions of great circles concur and intersect, represent the two poles, one Arctic, the other Antarctic. The line that divides the said great outer circle (namely the said Meridian) into two equal portions, passing through the center and terminating at two points equally distant from the said two poles, represents the equinoctial, or its common section with the said Meridian. And that which, passing through the center of the said Meridian, terminates at the said poles, represents the circle of 6 hours, where the cover of the equinoxes being the axis of the world or the common section of the said Meridian, like the cover of the solstices, with the said circle of six hours, like the cover of the equinoxes; so that in practice and use, the said two straight lines will serve as two great circles in the Sphere.

[Meridians and Hour Circles]
The portions of great circles which concur at two poles represent the Meridians in the convertible Sphere, passing through the said poles, and through all the divisions of the equinoctial, inasmuch as each of the said circles, by the circumvolution of the Sphere, can be placed under the meridian, and thus all successively can represent it. We shall call them hereafter, sometimes hour circles, sometimes vertical circles or Azimuths, sometimes meridians, sometimes circles of longitudes; and the one in the middle, represented by a straight line, shall be called by us the straight meridian, or circle of six hours, or straight vertical, first and principal, as their use shall require. And they are distant from each other in our Astrolabes to avoid confusion, from 10 to 10 degrees at most, and from 5 to 5 at least. Moreover, we have had them distinguished by 15-degree marks to distinguish the principal hour circles from the intermediate hour circles, namely the whole and complete hours from their parts, which will be known by the characters of the 24 hours that we have had affixed to them.

[Circles of Latitudes and Altitudes]
The portions of circles terminating at the said meridian in two equidistant points from one and the other pole, represent the circles of latitudes, or rather the parallels describable in the Sphere through all the divisions of the said meridian as degrees of altitudes, and the said circles are also distant from each other by two degrees in one, and by five in five in the other. They could be called Almucantarats or Circles of Altitudes, principally in the parallel Sphere. We shall call them sometimes simply parallels, sometimes circles of altitudes or latitudes, or of declinations; and the one in the middle, larger than the others, and represented by a straight line, we shall always call the equinoctial or straight horizon, or straight parallel. And the two, among the aforesaid parallels, which terminate at two points equidistant from the said equinoctial or straight horizon towards one and the other pole by a space of about 15 degrees, we shall call the two solstices or Tropics.

[The Ecliptic and Zodiac]
The straight line which, passing through the center of the said Meridian, and obliquely cutting all the aforesaid circles, joins the said two parallels (namely one and the other Tropic, in two opposite points of the said meridian), represents the circle of the ecliptic, and shall be called by us the Zodiac or Ecliptic, of which the central point represents the point of the equinoxes, or the beginning of Aries and Libra: and of the two other opposite points, one represents the beginning of Cancer or the Summer solstice, and the other the beginning of Capricorn or the Winter solstice. And between these are marked in their respective places the beginnings of the other signs and their intermediate degrees.

[The Movable Horizon (Ruler/Alhidade)]
And as the said planispheric plate is universal, so no particular horizon is described on it, but the ruler or common Alhidade of the Astrolabe, turning above, can represent an infinity of different horizons, so that according to a certain proposed place whose latitude is known, it is easy to fix the said ruler in such a situation that it represents the horizon of the said place, and the planispheric plate the constitution of the entire Sphere upon it. For this reason, in the use of the said plate, the said ruler will sometimes be called by us the movable horizon.

[Assembly of the Astrolabe]
All these parts of our Astrolabes, premised and explained, must finally, after due and proper arrangement, be joined, tightened, and secured into a single body of instrument by means of a screw-pin which traverses it through the middle with its small nut. Of which screw-pin and nut follows the figure.

[Preparations for Using the Astrolabe]
PREPARATIONS FOR THE USE of the Astrolabe.

[Knowing Table Elevation for Latitude]
PROPOSITION I. To know for what elevation of the pole each table of the Astrolabe is described. If you wish to know for what latitude or elevation of the pole each table of the Astrolabe is described, look in the Meridian line, how many Almucantarats or degrees are comprised from the equinoctial circle to the Zenith, or from the Pole (which is the center of the Astrolabe) to the horizon towards the North. And for this polar elevation and latitude, the table is composed, which can serve you for a place of similar latitude, or within one or two degrees: for example, 48 degrees of elevation will serve without sensible error for 47 and 49, and in a greater difference in case of need. This example is not difficult, and one only needs to pay attention to how many degrees the Almucantarats are drawn and divided, namely by two and two as in large instruments, or by three and three, or by five and five, as in small ones. This proposition is the 17th of Jacquinot's book, which seemed to us to precede the treatise on use, and is a preliminary step to knowing and choosing from an Astrolabe the plates of tables suitable and convenient for the place where they are to be practiced, before coming to their use and practice, even though the understanding of this proposition does not depend on any of the 26 preceding propositions concerning the use of the Astrolabe, but purely and simply on what has been said above in the treatise on the composition and explanation of its parts. This choice and preliminary preparation will give you this advantage, that the content of the said 16 propositions can be usefully practiced and put into use, or on the contrary, for lack of having made this choice and prepared the suitable and necessary plate for the place of your observation, or of the operation you will perform, in putting the said 16 propositions into practice, you will not be able to profit anything else, except to learn the simple method of practicing it, but nothing true will remain after your operation for the place of your dwelling. In a word, you will learn to handle and practice the Astrolabe, and you will learn nothing from the Astrolabe.

[Unknown Latitude and City Names]
And it should be noted, if you find yourself in some place whose latitude you do not know, that you can ascertain it by the following propositions. We have in some measure remedied this inconvenience, for in our small Astrolabes we have had the names of some principal cities inscribed, for which, and for nearby places, each table has been drawn.

[Choosing the Right Plate for a Location]
PROPOSITION II. To choose in the Astrolabe a suitable plate for each place. We add this second proposition as being the practice of what the preceding one has taught us, and as being its converse, and therefore easy to practice. For if in any proposed plate the number of Almucantarats or degrees comprised between the center of the Astrolabe and the horizon makes us know the latitude or elevation for which the said plate has been drawn: so also, if any latitude or polar elevation is proposed to us, we choose among the plates the one which will contain an equal or closer quantity of degrees, or Almucantarats, between the said center and horizon, and thus we can usefully enter into the practice and use of the Astrolabe, following the propositions of the treatise which follows.

[Examining and Rectifying Astrolabe Balance]
PROPOSITION III. To examine and rectify the balance of one's Astrolabe, and prepare it for observation.

[Astrolabe Leveling and Balance]
Let us add this third proportion, in the form of a very necessary precaution, to be able to use the Astrolabe both astronomically and geometrically in a very useful way. For if the Astrolabe is not level and in perfect balance, so that the meridian line is not perpendicular and plumb above the horizon, and its equinoctial line or the 6-hour line is not parallel to the horizon, it is impossible to correctly take and know any altitude of the Sun or stars above the horizon, and consequently to arrive at the precise knowledge of the hour, the declinations of the Sun and stars, the polar and equinoctial altitudes; in short, everything that depends on observation. It would even be a vain effort to want to measure any altitude, length, or depth by means of the geometric square, if the Astrolabe, and consequently the said square, were not first rectified.

[Rectifying the Astrolabe's Balance]
We therefore say that after having examined the alidade and recognized if it is well pierced and if its fiducial line is straight (which will be known to us when, in its entire revolution, it cuts an equal degree on both sides of the limb of the Astrolabe): to rectify the balance, the surest and easiest way is to suspend the Astrolabe by its ring, and having placed and fixed the alidade precisely on the 6-hour line, to see and observe through the pinholes some distant sign, and having turned the Astrolabe without moving the said alidade, to see if the same sign presents itself again to the view through the same pinholes; for in this case, the Astrolabe must be true and in balance. But if on one side a higher sign presents itself and on the other a lower sign, the Astrolabe needs to be rectified by adding inside some paper, cardboard, lead foil, brass, or other material, and this until the alidade is found pointed at the same sign at both ends.

[Finding the Sun's Degree and Nadir]
FIRST PROPOSITION OF JACQUINOT Concerning the Use and Utility of the Astrolabe. To find the degree of the sign in which the Sun is each day, with its Nadir. Inasmuch as the Sun is the principal rule of the movements of the Heavens, the King of the stars, and the light of the whole world, by which the distinction of time is made, both in quality and in measure, it will be very appropriate among the uses of the Astrolabe to begin with it, as the true director of all Cosmographic use. For this reason, to know its true place, that is, in what sign and degree of the Zodiac it is each day, place the rule on the back on the day of the month for which you wish to know the degree, and where the rule touches the circle of the twelve signs, there is the true place of the Sun for that day. And under the other part of this rule is its opposite degree, called by the Arabs the Nadir of the Sun, which can likewise be found by always taking as many degrees from the opposite sign (which is the seventh) as is the degree of the Sun in its sign. EXAMPLE. By placing the Rule on the fifteenth of April, I see that this rule falls directly on the fifth degree of Taurus in the circle of the signs. Therefore, I judge the Sun to be in that degree on that day around noon; and under the opposite part of the rule, I find the fifth of Scorpio, which is the Nadir of the Sun for the said time.

[Jacquinot's Example and Calendar Reform]
The procedure in the operation of this first proposition does not differ at all on our small Astrolabes from what Jacquinot says about it: But the example differs in some respect, for the rule placed on the said 15th day of April, will correspond precisely to the 15th degree 41 minutes or thereabouts of a degree of the sign of Aries, which differs little from 25 degrees and 55 minutes of the same sign that the Sun passed on the same day, this present year 1614. And the Nadir will also be the same opposite degree of the sign of Libra: And let us note in passing that David Robert, wishing in this whole treatise to reconcile Jacquinot's examples with the reform of the Calendar, always indiscriminately takes for the subtraction of 10 days an addition of ten degrees of the Zodiac, and by a deduction of 10 degrees, to reduce the days of the reformation to those of the old Calendar: in which there may be a difference, such as can be easily perceived by our small Astrolabes, where the fifteenth day of April is found to be much removed from the said 15th degree of Aries, where David Robert places it for the year 1617, in which the most correct ephemerides place it nearly two-thirds of a degree further than the said 15 degrees of Aries.

[Finding the Sun's Degree in Leap Years]
II. PROPOSITION. To find the degree of the Sun in the years we call Leap Years. Understand that the year is made up of three hundred sixty-five natural days, and about a quarter, which are six equal hours, from which portion every four years we make one day, which is placed and inserted on the sixth day before the Kalends of the month of March, which is called bissextile.

[Leap Year Adjustments for the Sun's Degree]
almost a day made and celebrated twice on this 6th Kalend, which is Saint Matthias's Day; and then the year is increased by one entire day, and is made of three hundred sixty-six days. Therefore, to find the degree of the Sun when it is Bissextile, if it is after the month of February, one must always anticipate by one day until the end of the said year; as if one wishes to find the degree of the Sun on the first of March, one must place the rule on the second day of that month, and take the degree found under the said rule for the first day mentioned above, and so for the others. EXAMPLE. In the year 1544, a bissextile year, wishing to find the degree of the Sun on the fifteenth of April, I place the rule on the back on the sixteenth of the said month, under which I see the sixth degree of Taurus fall, which is the degree of the Sun for this 15th day of March. And to find the Bissextile years, it must be noted that after having known one, one must count from four years to four years following, as the year 1544 was a bissextile year; Now, counting four years after, we will have that bissextile in the year 1548, and so consequently for the others, as the year

[Leap Year Calculation and Origin]
This second proposition is to be practiced when one knows that the proposed year is Bissextile, or how many years it is after the Bissextile. To know one or the other, let the number of the proposed year be divided by 4, or rather, since each centenary is divisible by 4, let all the centenaries of the number of the proposed year be subtracted, and the remainder divided by 4. If nothing remains, the year is bissextile; if 1, it is the first after the bissextile; if 2, the second; if 3, the third. But since in the bissextile year, in the use and practice of the Astrolabe, when the Ephemerides fail us for finding the true place of the Sun in the Zodiac, it is necessary to add one day to the month of February, which will then be 29 days, and for the rest of the year to make a similar anticipation, as for April 3rd to take the fourth, and for the 4th, the fifth. It seems appropriate in the first year after the Bissextile, to anticipate by a quarter of a day, in the second by a half, and in the third by three quarters; and thus to distribute this bissextile day equally among each of the four years, since each contributes equally to its composition. For the rest, this word Bissextile comes from the fact that February 24th, where the Roman Calendar counts the sexto Calendas, that is to say, on the sixth day before the Kalends of March, by the interposition and intercalation of one day every fourth year, one counts the bis sexto Calendas, that is to say, twice the sixth before the Kalends, and thus this day counted twice bis-

[Observing the Sun's Altitude]
III. PROPOSITION. To observe the altitude of the Sun above the horizon.

[Observing Sun's Altitude Throughout the Day]
To observe each day, and at all hours, how high the Sun is elevated above our horizon, both before and after midday. With the Sun shining, hang your Astrolabe correctly and freely by the ring, its back facing the Sun's rays. Then raise or lower the rule until the said rays pass directly through the apertures of the two pinnules of the said rule, noting the number of degrees inscribed next to the instrument's edge, starting from the nearest extremity of the transversal line which we have called the horizon. And this number of degrees will be the Sun's altitude. EXAMPLE. On the fifteenth of April in the morning, setting the rule's back directly towards the Sun's rays, until the said rays pass exactly through the apertures or slits of the two pinnules, we found in Paris, at an altitude of 48 degrees (where we will set all our examples), the Sun elevated above our horizon by 30 degrees, counting from the said horizon to the place of the rule. This altitude will serve us to find the hours and several other uses described hereafter.

[Distinguishing Morning and Evening Altitudes]
And it must be understood that this altitude is found to be of two differences: namely, matutine (morning) or vespertine (evening). The morning altitude is taken while the sun ascends from East to Midday, and the rest of the day is for the vespertine. Therefore, if around midday you are in doubt whether this altitude is matutine or vespertine, you must observe twice. If the second altitude is greater than the first, you will judge that the first was matutine; and if smaller, vespertine. EXAMPLE. After having found the Sun's altitude to be 46 degrees, I am in doubt if it is before or after midday. To remove this scruple, a short time later I observe this altitude again, which I find to be 46 and a half degrees. And because it is greater than the previous one, I judge therefore that it is still before midday.

[Correction of Pole Altitude in Paris]
David Robert corrected this altitude of the Pole in Paris, based on what he had read elsewhere. But we correct it by our own observations, which have assured us many times of 48 degrees 45 minutes, as we will show in its proper place hereafter.

[Further Altitude Differences]
There could also be two other differences in altitude not noted here: namely, two different equal altitudes equidistant from Midday, one of which would be after, and the other before. And two unequal ones, one smaller, the other larger, taken at such hours that nevertheless one would be before Midday and the other after Midday; but one further from Midday than the other. For example, if before Midday the Sun was found at an altitude of 40 degrees, and after Midday at an altitude of 40 degrees, the Sun would have been further from Midday than at 41 degrees. In which case, if you desire to be enlightened, you will need to make a third observation that you will compare with the second preceding one.

[Observing Star Altitude at Night]
IV. PROPOSITION. To know the altitude of the stars above the horizon at night. This proposition, and some others that follow, already presuppose knowledge of some star. Therefore, the place would require treating it, if it were not that several other things are required and necessary before knowing them, which we are constrained to defer and treat in its order. And to come to our purpose, it must be understood that between the observation of the altitude of the stars and that of the sun, there is no other difference, except that because the stars do not cast a sufficiently apparent shadow, one must look at them through the holes of the two pinnules, hanging the Astrolabe exactly above the eye, and raising or lowering the rule until, through its holes, with only one eye, one can see the star whose altitude one wishes to observe. This done, the degrees between the straight horizon and this rule measure the altitude of the said star, according to the numbers of degrees written next to the point that touches the rule. And if it happens that one is in doubt whether the altitude of this star is oriental or occidental, one must observe it twice and judge, as we said for the Sun. EXAMPLE. Wishing to observe the altitude of the star Spica Virginis, the Astrolabe hanging by its handle above my eye, I turn the rule until through its holes I can see the said star Spica Virginis. This done, leaving the rule at this point, I find that it touches the 30th degree of altitude, wherefore I say it is so elevated above our horizon. In this way, one can take the altitude of the sun when it does not cast a shadow, provided always that one can see it between two clouds, which is a good remedy in cloudy weather.

[Observing Meridian Altitude of Sun or Star]
V. PROPOSITION. To observe the meridian altitude of the Sun or a star. By meridian altitude, we mean the greatest of the entire day, which occurs when the sun or star passes through the meridian circle. This can be practiced in three ways, two of which are particular: One which presupposes certain knowledge of the elevation of the pole described in a table of the Astrolabe; The other, a description of the meridian line, which is not something one can easily carry or set up in its disposition without other aid. And the third, which is more certain and universal, does not require such knowledge or instrument.

[Calculating Meridian Altitude by Astrolabe]
Therefore, it is necessary to consider that to find this altitude by the first method, you will move the Sun's degree directly onto the midday line, between the Almicantaraths described for the elevation of the place where you wish to know this altitude. And the number of degrees between the said Almicantaraths, from the point that the said degree touches to the oblique horizon, will be the Sun's altitude at midday that day. You can do the same for a star, to find its meridian altitude. EXAMPLE. On the fifteenth of April, wishing to know in Paris how high the sun will be at midday, I place the fifth degree of Taurus (which is the Sun's place) on the midday line in the table which has 48 degrees of elevation. Therefore, I find the altitude at midday to be about 56 degrees, counting from the oblique horizon to the said degree on the midday line between the Almicantaraths.

[Meridian Altitude by Shadow Observation]
As for the second, one must have the description of the meridian line, as will be demonstrated hereafter, and observe the Sun's altitude when the shadow of the rod is conjoined with the Septentrional line. This altitude at such an hour will be the greatest the sun can have that day, which is called the meridian altitude.

[Universal Method for Meridian Altitude]
The third remains, which is more convenient (as it is said) and is universal, which we practice in this manner. One must begin a little before midday to observe this altitude several times at intervals, to retain or write it down. And when you see that it no longer increases, but rather diminishes, then from all these observed altitudes, take the greatest one for that of midday. The EXAMPLE is easy, as if observing the sun's altitude, I find 30 degrees of elevation, a little after 30 and a half, then 30 only, I will judge 30 and a half degrees to be the sun's meridian altitude on that day.

[Jacquinot's Meridian Altitude Confusion]
Jacquinot here confuses the knowledge of the Sun's meridian altitude that one can have by examining the Astrolabe with that which one can have by observation. One is the touchstone of the other; one presupposes the light of the Sun and the presence of its ray, the other can be known and practiced in full night. And as one is simple and depends solely on propositions.

[Setting Sun/Star Degrees on Almucantaraths]
previous five explanations, serving as a guide for the following ones. Another is printed and confused in methods of operation that are not yet taught, such as applying the degree of the Sun to the Almucantaraths or degrees of altitude, or erecting a style on a described meridian line, so that to remain within the terms of the proposition, without considering for now the first two methods that Jacquinot brings, of which mention will be made in their proper places, we will retain only the third. The example Jacquinot provides should be better linked with the preceding propositions; we will do it thus on our small Astrolabes. On the 15th day of August, the Sun being found at the 11th degree 10 minutes of the sign of Leo, I wish to observe the meridian altitude: I take the Astrolabe by its ring, and turn it in such a way, raising or lowering the alidade, that the Sun's ray can pass through the two perforations of the pinnules. Thus, little by little, as the Sun approaches its midday, I turn the Astrolabe and raise the alidade little by little until I see that the movement of the Sun forces me to lower it. Then I stop, and finding that the said alidade is arrested at 55 degrees 18 minutes or close to a third, I say that the Sun at that degree, that is to say, on the day of observation, has 55 degrees and nearly a third of meridian altitude above the horizon.

[Setting Sun/Star Degrees on Almucantaraths]
VI. PROPOSITION. To set the degrees of the Sun, or the stars, on their altitudes between the Almucantaraths. You must take the degree of the Sun, or the extremity of the star that you have previously known on the rete of the zodiac. And place them on the Almucantaraths at a similar altitude to that which you have found on the back elevated above the horizon, beginning to count in the eastern part of the oblique horizon, if it is before midday, or in the western, if it is after, until you have found the Almucantarath corresponding to your altitude. And place your degree of the Sun or star there. EXAMPLE. The Sun being at the 5th degree of Taurus, and its altitude found to be 30 degrees before midday, I count this altitude among the Almucantaraths, beginning from the eastern part (because it was morning), and there I set the said degree of the Sun, which being done, it is disposed at a similar altitude as it was found in the sky, which is for finding the hours, and other practices, as will be demonstrated presently. This can be stated more clearly thus: If the place of the Sun in the Zodiac is known to me, or any of the stars in the Sky, among those described on the Rete of my Astrolabe, and I have taken their altitude above the horizon, I will mark on the said Rete the degree where the Sun is in its Zodiac, or the said star, and likewise the Almucantarath or circle of altitude suitable for the altitude that I have found the Sun or the said star to have above the horizon, and I will apply on the said Almucantarath, or circle, the said degree of the Sun or the said star in the same part that I have observed it, namely Eastern if it is before midday, and Western if it is after midday. The example of this is in the following proposition.

[To Know Equal Hours by Day]
VII. PROPOSITION. To know the equal hour accurately by day. After having known the degree of the Sun by the first doctrine, and its altitude by the third, then by the preceding one, direct the said degree of the Sun to a similar altitude among the Almucantaraths: then by placing the rule on the degree of the Sun, you will see on how many hours and minutes (if there are any) the said rule falls on the circle of hours described on the limb of the instrument, taking fifteen degrees for each hour, and four minutes for each degree. EXAMPLE. On the 15th of April, desiring to know the hour, I find the Sun's altitude to be 30 degrees before midday. Thus, I place the fifth degree of Taurus (which is the degree of the Sun) at such an altitude among the Almucantaraths on the eastern side: and on this degree, I apply the rule, which shows me on the margin of the instrument that it is about eight hours in the morning. On our small Astrolabes, Jacquinot's example will give a difference in hour, and will be practiced as follows. In Paris, on the 15th of April in the morning, I wish to know the hour, and I find by observation that the Sun towards the East is elevated 30 degrees above the horizon. Having noted that the Sun's place in the Zodiac is the 25th degree, about 40 minutes of Aries, I place and fix the said 25th degree of Aries of the Zodiac on the rete on the 30th Almucantarath or circle of altitude on the Eastern side above the horizon of Paris (having already applied the appropriate plate for Paris, at a latitude of 48 degrees 45 minutes). Then, applying the rule according to its sidereal line, or which passes through the center, on the same degree of the Zodiac thus fixed, I look on the limb at what hour or part of an hour it corresponds in the same Eastern part, and I find that it was eight hours 10 minutes or so at the time of my observation.

[Alternatively with the Rectilinear Horologe]
Alternatively. With the Rectilinear Horologe. The method of practicing this proposition on the said horologe is very prompt and easy. Having knowledge of the Sun's degree, let it be marked between the arcs of the said horologe designating the parallels of the Sun, and either one or the other of the two meridian lines, one of which is for the Northern signs, and the other for the Southern; and applying the Alidade to it, make a mark easy to erase which corresponds precisely to the point marked for the Sun's degree. This mark will serve to know the equal hours throughout the proposed day; then taking the Sun's altitude with the back of the Astrolabe, and for this purpose presenting the side where the said horologe is described to the Sun, it will be noted on which line, or in what space of the hour lines, the said marked point on the Alidade will be found, counting from the upper meridian line for a Northern sign, and from the lower for a Southern: for such a line or space will be the equal hour or part of an hour required. If among the principal arcs marking the beginnings of the signs there are several intermediate ones designating the divisions and parts, as in our Astrolabes, in the largest of which each sign of the said horologe is divided into three spaces, each worth 10 degrees, it will not be necessary to make any mark on the Alidade, but simply having taken the Sun's altitude, it will be noted on which hour line or space the said Alidade will cut the arc of the parallel or degree of the Sun, whether it is traced or estimated between the others, for always the said intersection gives the required hour. EXAMPLE. On the thirteenth day of May in the morning, the Sun being about the 11th degree 40 minutes of Taurus, having made a mark on the Alidade at the location of the said degree, or having noted the parallel of the said degree between the arcs of the signs, and I take the Sun's altitude in the morning, and I find it to be 53 degrees 30 minutes, the Alidade remaining in this state, I will see that it will cut the parallel of the Sun, or that the point marked on it will be precisely fixed on the eight o'clock line, between the Northern hour lines, and that will be the hour of my observation. ALTERNATIVELY By the Universal Planisphere. As most of the other propositions are practiced more easily and

[Finding Time on the Universal Planisphere]
just as this is practiced more easily on common astrolabes than on the universal one, so too this particular method is practiced more easily on common ones than on the universal; nevertheless, since it occurs in its proper place, we will give the method. Having observed with the back of the Astrolabe or another suitable instrument, the height of the Sun above the horizon, place the Rule or movable horizon on the degree of the limb suitable for the latitude of the proposed place, for example, 48 degrees 45 minutes counting from one or the other pole (if it is in Paris), and on the said movable horizon or rule, having taken two points somewhat distant from each other, mark in the Ecliptic the degree of the Sun, together with the parallel of declination; and with a compass, form such a triangle on the distance of the said two points as a base, so that the apex or point of the said triangle terminates precisely in the said parallel of the Sun. Then, if, by bringing the said movable horizon to the equinoctial, one finds that the apex or point of the same triangle terminates at the parallel or circle of the height that was observed for the Sun, the said first point marked in the first position of the movable horizon, in the parallel of declination, will show between the meridians (which now serve as hour circles), counting from left to right if it is before noon, and conversely if it is after noon, the hour or part of an hour that it was at the time of the observation. EXAMPLE. In Paris, on the 15th day of April in the morning, having taken the height of the Sun as 50 degrees, I place the movable horizon on 48 degrees 45 minutes counting from the pole, or on 41 degrees 15 minutes counting from the equinoctial, and the Rule thus fixed, I look in the Ecliptic for the 15th degree and about 40 minutes of Aries, and considering the parallel of declination that passes through the said degree, I form a triangle on the said points marked on the movable horizon, whose apex terminates at the said parallel on the 3rd meridian or hour circle, counting from the 6 o'clock circle towards the limb (or rather on the 8 o'clock circle, and 10 minutes). Then, bringing the said horizon to the equinoctial or direct parallel, I find by forming the same triangle that its apex or point falls precisely on the 50th parallel or circle of height, counting from the said equinoctial (and now considered as the horizon); therefore, I say that at the time of my observation it was precisely 8 hours and 10 minutes. NOTE. 1. If it happens that by moving the said movable horizon to the equinoctial, the apex of the said triangle does not fall on the parallel of the observed height, it will be necessary to form another triangle (and so on until one has one whose apex falls both on the parallel of declination in the first position of the Rule, and on the parallel of height in the second). NOTE. 2. To facilitate the practice of this proposition and some following ones on the said universal planispheric plate, it would be good to have a small movable pointer called a brachiolum attached to the Rule, whose extremity will always represent the apex of the said triangle, for what we describe as the said triangle is only for want of the said movable pointer, which should be of three or at least two pieces, as can be seen in the figure we have added here, with the Rule pierced at two equidistant points from the center to maintain balance, one of which the said movable pointer will be attached with a small screw in such a way that its point can be transported and guided where it is needed, and stop at the place where the said apex of the said triangle should meet, of which alone, after this warning, we will make use hereafter to serve, as has been said, in the absence of the said brachiolum or movable pointer.

[Knowing Equal Hours by the Stars]
When one wishes to know the hours by the stars, take (as is said in the fourth proposition) the height of a described star, or one placed in the rete of the Astrolabe, and direct its height between the Almucantaraths according to what you have found in the sky. Afterwards, bring the rule to the degree of the Sun, and it will show you the equal hour in the limb. EXAMPLE. On the fifteenth of April, I found the star Spica Virginis elevated 30 degrees in the eastern part; therefore, I direct its extremity or point to the said height, and afterwards I place the rule on the degree of the Sun, the fifth of Taurus, which shows me in the limb of the instrument that it is 5 hours and about twelve minutes past noon in Paris. In our Astrolabe, it will be necessary to take, as above, the 25th degree of Aries, and the hour that will result from the said height of 30 degrees will be after 10 hours.

[On the Universal Planisphere]
The practice of this proposition on our universal planisphere presupposes the knowledge of the Right Ascensions of both the stars and the Sun, and therefore is too long a discourse, and moreover out of season.

[Knowing the Beginning and End of Twilight]
By the beginning of morning twilight, we mean daybreak or the point at which day begins to appear; and by evening twilight, the end of the vulgar day and the beginning of obscure night. And to know each day the end or beginning of these twilights, direct the degree of the Sun, with the small rule, to the twilight line on the eastern side; it will show you the hour at which morning twilight begins. Similarly, you will find the evening twilight by applying the said degree and rule to the western part of the twilight line. Or otherwise, it can be known by placing the opposite degree of the Sun on the 18th degree of height between the Almucantaraths, towards the western part; for the rule placed on the degree of the Sun will show you between the equal hours the beginning of morning twilight. Thus, the said opposite degree placed on the 18th Almucantarath in the eastern part, the rule placed on the degree of the Sun, will denote on the limb the hour and minutes at which the said evening twilight will end. EXAMPLE. On the 15th day of April, I place the degree of the Sun (which is the 5th of Taurus) on the twilight line towards the East, and the small rule placed thereon shows me on the hour circle that the point of day at the beginning of twilight is about three o'clock in the morning; and this being moved with the degree of the Sun to the same line in the western part, I perceive the end of the said twilight to be about 9 o'clock in the evening. Since Jacquinot has given us only one example of the construction of this proposition by the first method on the twilight line, and has not given us one for the second method in the absence of the said line, we supply this lack here with an example on our small Astrolabes. Let us therefore propose the same day, April 15th, on which you desire to know the beginning of morning twilight and the end of evening twilight. Since on that day the Sun is about the 25th degree 40 minutes of Aries, you will take in the Zodiac of your Rete its opposite degree, the 25th degree 40 minutes of Libra, and place it on the 18th Almucantarath on the western side. In this state, the said 25th degree 40 minutes of Aries, being found below the eastern horizon, shows that the Sun would then begin to give twilight; therefore, bring the rule to it and fix it on the said degree, and it will show you on the limb the hour and part of an hour at which the said twilight begins, namely 5 hours and 10 minutes in the morning. Similarly, if you transfer the said opposite degree, 25 degrees 40 minutes of Libra, to the same Almucantarath on the eastern side, the rule transferred to the degree of the Sun, 25 degrees 40 minutes of Aries, will show you on the said limb 8 hours 50 minutes in the evening. Otherwise by the universal planisphere.

[Twilight Calculation Example]
Let it be as we have said, that the rule or movable horizon on the astrolabe is set according to the proportion of 7 miles, or the height of the pole required. And on the aforesaid two marked points, a triangle is formed, whose apex falls within the parallel of the Sun's declination. This is while it is still below the horizon, and in such a way that when the said rule is transferred to the equinoctial, the apex of the same triangle falls into the 18th parallel below the said rule, that is to say, on the 18th degree of depression below the horizon. In this case, the said rule being returned to its first place, the apex of the same triangle will show you, between the hour circles, the hour and parts when twilight begins in the morning and ends in the evening. EXAMPLE. The Editor. April 15th, the Sun being at 15 degrees 40 minutes of Aries, I wish to know the beginning of morning twilight and the end of evening twilight. The rule, as said, is placed on 48 degrees 45 minutes of pole height for Paris, and the said triangle formed. I see that its apex falling within the Sun's parallel, the said rule being transferred to the equinoctial, it falls and corresponds to the 18th parallel below the said rule. Then, returning it to its first place, I see that the said apex falls on the said parallel of the Sun between the hour circles of 3 and 4 o'clock in the morning, or 8 and 9 o'clock in the evening, namely at 3 hours and 10 minutes in the morning, and 8 hours 50 minutes in the evening. I say that such is the beginning of morning twilight and the end of evening twilight for the proposed day. But if the said apex of the triangle did not fall precisely, from the first time, on one or the other parallel, the said rule being transferred, it would be necessary, as said, to reiterate and form other triangles until one is found that can do so.

[Proposition X: Twilight Duration]
PROPOSITION X. To know the quantity of morning and evening twilight. Twilight is found in two different ways (as has been said). The quantity, or duration of time, of morning twilight is the time from daybreak until the Sun rises, being equal to evening twilight, which is measured on the same day from sunset until complete darkness. These twilights the common people attribute to artificial day, and philosophers to night. And to know each day how long morning twilight lasts: it is necessary to know, by the preceding doctrine, at what hour it begins, and by the following, the hour the Sun rises. The difference between the two times noted on the hour circle will give you the quantity of the said morning twilight, to which the evening twilight of the same day is always equal. EXAMPLE. Wishing to know how long the morning twilight of April 15th lasts, I place the 15th degree of Taurus on the twilight line, with the small rule in the eastern part, and find that it begins around three o'clock in the morning on the limb of the instrument. Afterwards, I transfer the said degree together with the rule to our eastern horizon, where I likewise see on the said limb the Sun rise around five o'clock. Therefore, I perceive this duration to be two equal hours, which is similar to the evening twilight, which will be two hours from sunset until the end of the same day. For by the quantity of one known, the other is easily known. This proposition depends as much on the next following as on the preceding, and therefore we will add it as a corollary to the said following proposition, that is to say, at two hours 45 minutes, that is to say, 5 hours minus 5 minutes according to Jacquinot.

[Proposition XI: Sunrise and Sunset]
PROPOSITION XI. To know the hour the Sun rises or sets each day. Place the degree of the Sun on the oblique horizon of your table in the eastern part; and by applying your rule over it, it will show you on the limb the hour the Sun rises in all regions of latitude similar to your table or nearest. And by transferring the said rule with the degree of the Sun to the horizon in the western part, it will similarly demonstrate to you at what hour the Sun sets on the same day. EXAMPLE. By placing the 5th of Taurus on the oblique horizon in the eastern part, I see that the Sun rises at five o'clock, and by moving it to the western part, I also know that it sets at seven o'clock. We find a little before 5 o'clock in the morning, as a little after 7 o'clock in the evening, according to Jacquinot, which happens at present, according to our small Astrolabes, around April 25th. ANOTHER METHOD. With the Rectified Horologe. The practice of this proposition on this small horologe consists only in considering on which line or hourly space the parallel or degree of the Sun, known for the proposed day, will cut the horizontal line of the Astrolabe, which represents the line of the six equinoctial hours of the said horologe. For the said line or hourly space on which the intersection will occur will show the hour or part of an hour of the Sun's rising or setting, taking the summer lines for the northern signs, and the winter lines for the southern. EXAMPLE. On the ninth day of April, the Sun being around the 20th of Aries, you will recognize by the intersection of the parallel of 20 degrees of Aries with the said horizontal line, or of 6 hours, between 5 and 6 summer hours, that at such an hour the Sun rises in the morning, and therefore that it sets in the evening between 6 and 7 hours quite precisely. ANOTHER METHOD. By the Universal Planisphere. Let the rule or horizon be placed according to the constitution of the Sphere for the proposed place, and mark the point where it will cut the parallel of the Sun between the hour circles. For the one of these on which this happens will give the rising and setting of the Sun in the same hours for which it will have the characters; and if this happens between two of the said circles, one will have the parts of an hour that it will be convenient to add to the next preceding hour. For example, on the said day, April 15th, the Sun being at 15 degrees 40 minutes of Aries, after having placed the rule under the 48th degree 15 minutes of equinoctial height for Paris, I see that the parallel of the Sun is cut by the said rule between the hour circles of 5 and 6 hours in the morning, or of 6 and 7 in the evening, precisely at 14 minutes after the said 5 hours in the morning, or 46 minutes after 6 hours in the evening (giving, as said, to each space between the circles 8 minutes of an hour). Thus I say that on such a day in Paris, the Sun rises at 5 hours 14 minutes in the morning, and sets at 6 hours 46 minutes in the evening. COROLLARY. So that the space of time between the beginning of twilight and the rising of the Sun gives the duration of the said morning twilight, and between the setting of the Sun and the end of twilight, its evening duration. And the said spaces on the same day are equal, or at least imperceptibly different according to the difference of the Sun's declination from one to the other. EXAMPLE. By Proposition 9, on the said day, April 15th, twilight begins at 3 hours 7 minutes, and by this one, the Sun rises at 5 hours 14 minutes in the morning. Therefore, their difference, which is 1 hour 59 minutes, gives for the said day the duration of the said twilight, both morning and evening.

[Proposition XII: Counting Hours]
PROPOSITION XII. To count how many hours have passed since sunrise or sunset.

[Reducing Our Hours to Other Supputations]
Because the use of the Astrolabe is universal, and because some nations begin their hours from the rising or setting of the sun, we will provide a method for reducing our hours to that computation. To do this, take the degree of the Sun, placing it on the Almicantarath at its found altitude, and with the rule placed over it, note the point where it touches the degrees of the limb. Then bring it with the degree of the sun to the oblique horizon in the East, noting again the point it touches on the limb. Afterwards, divide the degrees between the two marks by 15. Thus you will have the equal hours of the day from sunrise. Similarly, do the same for the night after having found the hour by some star. Mark the position of the rule placed on the degree of the sun; then, bringing it with the rule to the western horizon, you will again note the position of the rule, and the space between the two positions, divided by 15, as before, will show you the hours since sunset. The practice of the Astrolabe. 105.

[Jacquinot's Intent on Hour Reduction]
David Robert has here followed what the editors of the second impression have improperly changed, without considering what Jacquinot's intention was in giving this proposition. For it was not simply to make known how many hours the Sun has been above each proper horizon from its rising until the hour of observation, but to give a way to reduce our French equal hours into Babylonian equal hours, or from one sunrise to another, and into Italian hours, or from one sunset to another. And to make the use of the Astrolabe suitable for this subject, both for those who count hours from midday, as we do in France, and for those who count them from sunrise or sunset, as in Italy.

[Jacquinot's Practice is Easy]
What Jacquinot says, that the practice of this proposition is easy and requires no example, is true, inasmuch as the equal hour being known by the 7th and 8th propositions, and by the 11th, the hour of the sun's rising or setting, the interval of hours, or space between the two, is what this proposition requires. And thus the French hour from midday or midnight will be reduced to Babylonian or Italian hours from sunrise or sunset, as if it were 9 o'clock in the morning, and the Sun rose at 5 o'clock, you would say it is 4 hours of Sun. And at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, you would say it is 11 hours of Sun in Babylonian hours, or 11 hours in Italian hours from sunset.

[With the Rectilinear Horologe]
This proposition is very easy for daytime hours only. For by the 11th proposition, the hour of the Sun's rising being known, and by the 7th, the hour of the day, the space between the two is the required hour from sunrise, or Babylonian hour. Thus, 3 hours after midday from 5 o'clock sunrise, you would say it would be 8 Babylonian hours. But because this horologe does not provide knowledge of the hours of the night, we do not speak here of reducing French equal hours into Italian or other hours.

[On the Universal Planisphere]
This proposition does not differ in any way on the universal Planisphere from what we have said about the 7th and 11th preceding propositions.

[Measure Day and Night Length]
By the quantity of the day, we understand the space of time from the rising of the sun until its setting; which is measured by the arc of the Equinoctial, ascending on the horizon with half of the zodiac, starting from the degree of the sun down to its Nadir according to the order of the lines. And to know this quantity, place the degree of the Sun on the first Almicantarath or oblique horizon in the East, then turn the degree of the sun with the said rule to the West on the same oblique horizon, carefully noting the place where the small rule touches the degrees of the limb. And the movement of the rule, from the Eastern point to the Western one, on the circle of hours, is the diurnal arc, or quantity of the artificial day, and the rest of the said circle is that of the night: for these two arcs together contain 360 degrees, which is the quantity of the natural day. EXAMPLE. The fifth degree of Taurus placed on the oblique horizon in the East shows me with the rule the sun rising at 5 hours, and that being transferred to the West on the same horizon with that rule, I see its setting to be at seven hours; therefore I say the arc, or quantity of the day, is 14 hours, and that of the night is 10 hours, which is the remainder of the natural day. This you can find more easily by counting from sunrise to the midday line.

[Calculating Day and Night Halves]
For such a space will show you half of the day, which doubled will yield the entire day. Similarly, if you count from that mark to the midnight line, you will have half of the night, whose double will show the entire night. EXAMPLE. By placing the 5th degree of Taurus on the oblique horizon at the table of 48 degrees of elevation, I find the sun rising at five hours: therefore I count from that mark to the midday line, where I find the semidiurnal arc to be seven hours: then by doubling it, I know the whole day to be and contain 14 entire hours. Similarly, I find from the point that the rule touches to the midnight line, the quantity of half the night to be five hours; that doubled will yield 10 hours for the quantity of the night.

[Arc of the Equinoctial]
That is to say, by the arc of the equinoctial comprised by the revolution of the degree of the Zodiac where the Sun is, from the Eastern part of the oblique horizon to the Western part, which arc is equal to that which ascends on the oblique horizon with half of the said Zodiac, from the place of the Sun to its Nadir, or opposite degree, which will be found on the oblique horizon in the East when the degree of the Sun is transferred to the Western part.

[Diurnal and Nocturnal Arcs]
It is very true, taking for ease and insensible difference the same degree or part of a degree for the place of the Sun rising and setting, that the two diurnal and nocturnal arcs will together comprise 360 degrees. But if, practicing this proportion more carefully, you take for the rising Sun its known degree in the Zodiac with regard to its movement in the same place, and you take for its setting the degree where it should then be found on the same day, you will find some difference, and that the quantity of the natural day composed of the said two diurnal and nocturnal arcs will exceed the said 360 degrees by a small amount. For the Western semidiurnal arc will sometimes be found a little larger or smaller than the Eastern, and similarly for the two seminocturnal arcs. You will know this, for example, by having placed for the rising of the Sun the 5th degree of Taurus on the Eastern oblique horizon, the rule shows you on the limb the Sun rising at 5 hours; and therefore the Eastern semidiurnal arc is 7 hours. For, transferring the said degree towards the West, if you place beyond the 5th degree about 30 minutes of Taurus on the same Western horizon, the said rule, transferred, will show you the Sun setting at 7 hours 3 minutes, and therefore the Western semidiurnal arc is larger than the Eastern by 3 minutes: which, being as said almost imperceptible, it will suffice to know one or the other semidiurnal or nocturnal arc.

[Doubling for Full Arc]
nal, to know the entire diurnal or nocturnal arc by doubling it. More promptly by the Universal Planisphere.

[Calculating Diurnal and Nocturnal Arcs]
The rule being set according to the proposed latitude of the place, its intersection with the Sun's parallel will give you, between the meridians or hour circles, and this above the said rule or in the superior hemisphere, from the said intersection up to the exterior meridian, the quantity of the semi-diurnal arc, which doubled will give the artificial day; and below the said rule, beneath the horizon and in the inferior hemisphere, up to the opposite part of the same exterior meridian, the quantity of the semi-nocturnal arc, which doubled will give the artificial night. You can also obtain this if, for the quantity of the day, you double the hour of the Sun's setting, and for the quantity of the night, the hour of its rising. Thus, on the 15th day of April, the Sun being at 15 degrees 40 minutes of Aries, setting at 6 hours 46 minutes, double that is 13 hours 32 minutes, which gives its diurnal arc for the quantity of the artificial day; and rising at 5 hours 14 minutes, double that is 10 hours 28 minutes, which gives its nocturnal arc for the quantity of the night.

[Using the Quadrant or Dial]
This proportion is easy to practice on this small dial, following the 11th proposition of the Astrolabe, for the space from the Sun's rising until its setting is the artificial day, and that from the said setting until its rising the next day is what is called the artificial night. Now, this space is determined by doubling the quantity of the lines, or hourly spaces, which intersect each parallel of the Sun, counting from the horizontal line, or from 6 o'clock, up to the midday line; and from the said midday line up to the same 6 o'clock line, according to how you see the said lines marked, serving for the morning hours and those after midday. Thus, the parallel of Aries and Libra is divided into 12 spaces for the 12 equinoctial hours; that of Taurus or Scorpio into nearly 7 spaces for nearly 14 hours of artificial day, which leaves 10 and a little more for the artificial night, and so for the others.

[XIV. PROPOSITION. To know the Diurnal and Nocturnal Arcs of the Stars.]
The diurnal arc of the stars is called the space of time during which they pass from East through the meridian to West, at whatever hour it may be, whether by day or by night. And the nocturnal arc is the space they remain below the horizon, which spaces are measured by the degrees of the equinoctial described on the limb of the Astrolabe: to know this, place the point of the stars that set or rise on the oblique horizon, with the rule, marking the place on the limb that the said rule touches: then count from this mark to the midday line, and you will have half of the diurnal arc of that star, which taken twice will show the entire arc, which is the time it remains above our hemisphere. EXAMPLE. I place the end of the star Spica Virginis on the oblique eastern horizon; then, applying the rule over it, it shows me on the circumference of the instrument the hour and minutes it begins to rise above our horizon, namely at 6 hours 36 minutes in Paris, from which point I count up to the midday line, and find the semi-diurnal arc to be 5 hours 24 minutes; which arc I double, and it results in 10 hours 48 minutes, which is the space of time it takes to pass from East to West: and the remainder of 24 hours, namely 13 hours and 12 minutes, will be the quantity that this star remains below our horizon.

[On the Universal Planisphere.]
This proposition does not differ in any way on the Universal Planisphere from the preceding one, except that instead of the Sun's parallel, one must consider the parallel of the proposed star.

[XV. PROPOSITION. To know the unequal hours by day.]
After having directed the degree of the Sun on the Almucantars at the height you have observed it, or at the place of the equal hour that it is then, if it is otherwise known to you, the nadir of the Sun will show you below the horizon the unequal hour between the arcs described for the said hours. As for example, I look at eight o'clock in the morning where the 5th degree of Scorpio (which is the Nadir of the 5th of Taurus) is, and I find it on the third unequal hour between their circles below the horizon, which hours begin in the western part, extending by the midnight line to the East, as has been said before. Thus I conclude that the Sun being at the 5th degree of Taurus, when it is eight o'clock in the morning by equal hours, it is three unequal hours. This conclusion is missing in Jacquinot's original text, which was rather poorly supplemented by the second impression that David Robert made, in that he stated that the opposite degree of the Sun shows 5 and a half unequal hours, whereas it should only be three hours. Furthermore, it should be noted that we call unequal hours the twelfth parts of the entire Artificial day or of the Artificial night, from the Sun's rising until its setting, or from its setting until its rising; for this space being divided by 12, each 12th part will be an unequal hour. On our small Astrolabe, for the 15th day of April, having set the 15th degree 40 minutes of Aries under 8 hours 20 minutes in the morning (from the example on the 7th proposition), I see that its opposite degree, 15 degrees 40 minutes of Libra, corresponds to 2 and 3/4 unequal hours: therefore I say that on the said day, April 15th, at 8 hours 20 minutes in the morning, it is 2 and three-quarter unequal hours.

[Otherwise by the Universal Planisphere.]
On our planispheric plate, this unequal hour can be found in this way: the rule being set at the required pole height, observe on which hour circle or interval it cuts the Sun's declination parallel, and count how many hours or minutes there are from the meridian to the said intersection, in the superior hemisphere; likewise, how many hours or minutes there are from the proposed hour to the same intersection; that is to say, if the total of hours between the meridian and the intersection of the rule gives six hours, how much will the space between the proposed hour and the same intersection give? And the fourth proportional term will be the quantity of unequal hours passed from the Sun's rising until the said proposed hour. For example, on the said day, April 15th, at 8 hours 20 minutes in the morning, the rule being in its place, I see that it cuts the Sun's parallel, being at 25 degrees 40 minutes of Aries, between the hour circles of 5 and 6 o'clock in the morning, namely at 5 hours 14 minutes (taking each space between the said circles of our planispheres at the largest for 5 and at the smallest for 20 minutes), so that from 5 hours 14 minutes until midday I count 6 hours 46 minutes, and from the said 5 hours 14 minutes until the said 8 hours 20 minutes I count 3 hours 6 minutes. Therefore I say if 6 hours 46 minutes (or 406 minutes) give 6 unequal hours, how much will 3 hours 6 minutes (or 186 minutes) give? The quotient and fourth proportional term is 2 hours, with 15 minutes, which is very close to 103 for the unequal hour.

[XVI. PROPOSITION. To know the unequal hours by night.]
Similarly, after having directed the point of some known star in your rete, at a similar height among the Almucantars that you have observed on the horizon, the Alidade placed on the degree or place of the Sun will show you, as has been said, on the limb the equal hour: between the arcs of the said unequal hours, the unequal hour that corresponds to it. Let, for example, the height of Sirius be taken as 30 degrees, its point in the rete being placed on the 30th Almucantar, and the rule moved over the Sun's place.

[Unequal Hours on the Limb]
on the 25th degree of Aquarius for the 14th day of February, you will see on the limb, under the said rule, 2 hours, 21 minutes of equal hours, and between the said arcs, 1 hour of unequal hours.

[Note on Unequal Hours]
NOTE. As we have not found it appropriate to mix the knowledge of unequal hours of the day with that of equal hours at the beginning of the practice of the Astrolabe, as it is something that merited some other prior knowledge; so we have extracted this from Jacquinot's 9th proposition: to set aside the knowledge of the unequal hours of the night by means of the stars, from that of equal hours.

[Finding Unequal Hours with a Quadrant]
XVII. PROPOSITION. To find the unequal hour of the day by a quadrant placed on the back of the Astrolabe. You can also observe the unequal hours with a quadrant described on the back of the Astrolabe near the horizon line by six small arcs, not so precisely, but the said quadrant is general for all regions for which one would not have tables described, by taking the height of the Sun at midday, by the fifth proposition, and marking it on the degrees of altitude, on the side where the said quadrant is described, and applying the rule to it, one must note at what point the six o'clock line cuts this rule, and mark that point with wax or ink, which mark will serve you for two or three days. Afterwards, hold your Astrolabe in your hand, and make the Sun's rays pass through the holes of the pinnules of the rule, and such a mark will show you the unequal hours between their arcs and circles: and the equal ones also if they were described there, although they cannot be universal like the unequal ones.

[Example: Finding Unequal Hours]
EXAMPLE. On the fifteenth of April, I find the height of the Sun at midday to be 55 degrees, therefore at such a height, directing the rule of the back, I mark the point where it touches the six o'clock line: then afterwards to know the unequal hour, I direct the rule until the Sun's rays pass through the holes of the two pinnules, which is found to be elevated by 53 degrees, then I see this mark fall on three unequal hours, and on eight and a half hours among the equal hours, which are described for an elevation of 48 degrees. Having found Jacquinot's text here somewhat incomplete and obscure, we have restored it and made it clearer. David Robert says nothing about it, he appears a little further down in the example where he changes 55 to 52 degrees of the Sun's meridian height for April 15th in Paris, but with as little certainty as Jacquinot, if he had put 51 degrees and almost a quarter, he would have approached the truth more than he did. Moreover, we have judged this Quadrant, of which our author speaks, to be of little utility, and we did not want to add it to our small Astrolabe for this subject; instead, we have put in its place the small Quadrant or Bilimbat clock, for the prompt knowledge of equal hours, of which a word has been and will be said later.

[Converting Equal to Unequal Hours]
XVIII. PROPOSITION. To reduce equal hours, or what are called clock hours, into unequal hours. Reduction of equal hours to unequal, or vice versa, is properly by the knowledge of one to come to the knowledge of the other. This can be practiced by the Astrolabe in this manner. FIRST. To reduce equal hours to unequal, one must direct the degree of the Sun, with the rule, to the equal hour that will be then; and afterwards, if it is daytime, look at the Nadir of the Sun what unequal hour it shows between its circles, or if it is nighttime, at the same degree of the Sun, by doing this you will know what unequal hour it will be. EXAMPLE. Let us suppose that we want to reduce 4 equal hours into unequal, that is to say, to know what unequal hour it will be then, one must direct the rule with the degree of the Sun, which is the 5th of Taurus, to four equal hours after midday: then look at the Nadir of the Sun, which is the fifth of Scorpio, below the horizon which shows me 10 unequal hours: but if it were nighttime, then one would have to look at the degree of the Sun, and not at the Nadir, as it was said before. On the contrary, to reduce unequal to equal, one must direct the Nadir of the Sun to some unequal hour, then place the rule on the degree of the Sun, and it will show you on the limb the equal hour corresponding to the unequal hour. But if it is nighttime, one would have to direct the degree of the Sun under it, and not its Nadir. This proposition does not differ in any way from what we said about it on the 15th, and is only a repetition. David Robert would have done much better to say nothing here, as he does in many other places that need it more, for he makes his ignorance quite notorious here in that he reproaches Jacquinot for using the degree of the Sun for the reduction of equal hours into unequal hours, saying that there is no need to use the said degree, since one knows what hour it is, therefore he still gives a reason as impertinent as one who would say that the Sun does not shine because it is day, or that one does not need the degree of the Sun to know the hour, because the degrees are on the rete, and the hours on the limb. But to defend Jacquinot, we say that for the reduction of equal hours into unequal, it is absolutely necessary to know the degree of the Sun, so that, with the rule, placed under the known equal hour, one can see at what unequal hour its Nadir or opposite degree will meet it, if it is daytime: and if it is nighttime, the same degree placed under the known equal hour will show between the arcs of the unequal hours the one that corresponds to it, the reason for which is that the unequal hours being the 12 parts of the entire Artificial day from the rising of the Sun until its setting, and conversely for the Artificial night, as we have said above, and this space of day or night being different according to the diverse declinations and oblique ascensions of the Sun, it is necessary to know the degree of the Sun to know it either entirely, or its 12 parts. Otherwise, let it be as David Robert wants, if only the rule is placed on 3 and a half hours of the morning, it will cut under the oblique horizon three different arcs of unequal hours, namely 1, 2, and 3 hours; I ask him which is the required one, but if the degree of the Sun or its Nadir meets it, it will give it.

[Planetary Rulers of Hours]
XIX. PROPOSITION. To know which planet dominates and rules each hour of the day and night. Because we have spoken of unequal hours, which are attributed to the seven planets, the place requires giving knowledge at all hours, both day and night, which planet rules. Therefore, it must be understood that there are two differences of hours, namely the common or vulgar, which is made by equal hours, each of which contains the 24th part of the natural day. The other is particular to the Physicists, which refers to the natures and qualities of the planets, for this reason they are called natural or unequal hours, because they are the twelfth part of the artificial days and nights, which are most often unequal one from the other, and the hours of the day do not correspond to those of the night: but are longer or shorter, except at the beginning of the two equinoxes, where the day and night are made of 12 hours equally throughout the world. And to know in what power and domination of the planets each hour is: We have here ordered a table, of which the use is such.

[Finding Planetary Hours]
One must look at the day of the week, described on the left-hand side of the following table, and what unequal hour of that day we are in. These hours are found in the upper part of the table, distinguished by two types of numbers: one in numerals for the hours of the day, and the other in vulgar (Roman) numerals for those of the night. This done, you must descend from that number to the common intersection point to the right of your day, where you will find the character of the planet that then dominates. EXAMPLE. On Sunday, I wish to know which planet dominates at four unequal hours of the day. I go to the table to find Sunday on the left-hand side, and the number 4 at the top of the table written in numerals. Then, descending downwards to the common intersection point to the right of Sunday, I find the character 'd', which indicates it is the hour of the Moon. And if it were night, I would take the number 'iiij' (4) in vulgar numerals: and descending to the common intersection, I would find the character of Venus, which dominates at four hours of the night. And similarly for the other hours of the day and night. Table for finding the hours of the planets. Day hours: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 Night hours: i, ii, iii, iiii, v, vi, vii, viii, ix, x, xi, xii Sunday: Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn Monday: Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun Tuesday: Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon Wednesday: Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars Thursday: Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury Friday: Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter Saturday: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus This proposition is easy without a table. Having found the equal hour by the preceding propositions, along with the unequal hour that corresponds to it, let the planet that names the proposed day be noted (as if it is a Tuesday, Mars; a Friday, Venus; and so on for the others). And to this same planet, the first unequal hour is attributed; to the next inferior, the second; to the third, the third; and so on consecutively, starting again from the first if necessary. The planet to which the proposed unequal hour falls will be its master or ruler. By the example of proposition 19, at 8 hours 20 minutes of the morning, which correspond to 2 hours 45 minutes of unequal hours. If it is a Saturday, the first of these unequal hours will belong to Saturn; the second, to Jupiter; the third, to Mars. So that the said proposed hour, being between the 2nd and 3rd unequal hours, will be under the dominion of the planet Jupiter.

[Rising and Setting of Stars]
To know all the hours when the stars described on the Astrolabe rise or set. This canon refers only to stars that rise and set, and not to those that always remain below the horizon, namely those closest to the pole. To know, therefore, the rising and setting of the aforesaid stars, place their pointer on the eastern horizon of your region, and the rule placed on the degree of the sun will show you on the limb of the instrument the hour and minutes they rise. Similarly, by turning them on the horizon in the western part, the said degree of the sun with the rule will show you the hour of their setting within the circle of hours. EXAMPLE. If I wish to know at what hour Spica Virginis rises, I place its pointer on our Eastern horizon; and by placing the rule on the 20th degree of Taurus (where we suppose the sun to be that day), I know that it rises 15 hours 10 minutes after midday. And by turning it to the Western part on the said horizon, it is found to set that day at 4 hours and about 9 minutes in the morning. It must be said more generally that this proposition cannot be understood for stars that never set and are always above the horizon, nor for those that never rise and are always below. In a word, it cannot be understood for those that are closer to the poles than the said poles are to our horizon. On the Universal Planisphere. This proposition presupposes on the universal planisphere the movement and revolution of the Sphere, or the knowledge of the difference of right ascension between the sun and each proposed star, which depends on the knowledge of tables. That is why we will not put the practice here. XXI. PROPOSITION. To know with what degree of the Zodiac each star rises or sets, and passes through the meridian. One must direct the pointer of the star onto the oblique horizon, in the Eastern part, and the degree of the Zodiac that will be found on that horizon is the degree that rises with it. Similarly, to know with what degree it sets, one must transport it to the Western part. Also, to have the degree with which it comes to the meridian, one must direct it onto the meridian line, and the degree that falls on the said line is the one with which it passes through the Midheaven. Note that in the right sphere, the same degree with which the star comes to the meridian is the one with which it sets and rises. EXAMPLE. I place the pointer of the star Spica Virginis on the oblique horizon towards the East: this done, I perceive that it rises with the 18th degree of the sign of Libra. And bringing it back to the West on the said horizon, I find that it sets with the 12th degree of the said sign. Similarly, I find the 17th of Libra with it in the midheaven, which degree will come together on the right horizon, both in the East and in the West. The correctors of the second impression that David Robert has judged, have changed in this example the 18 degrees of co-ascension to 8 degrees 40 minutes, the 12 degrees of co-mediation of the Midheaven to 13; and the 17 degrees of co-ascension to 5; but I do not see on what foundation. On our reformed Astrolabes, it will be found that the said star rises with the 19th degree of Libra, reaches the meridian with the 17th degree and 19 minutes, and sets with the 12th degree 40 minutes of the same sign, which will be found to conform sufficiently to more exact tables. On the Universal Planisphere. One cannot conveniently accomplish on the said planisphere all that this proposition desires, inasmuch as it presupposes several things not yet put into practice here, such as for the co-ascending degree, to find the degree in the ecliptic having the same right ascension as the star, the point on the horizon where the star rises, that is to say where the parallel of the star cuts the horizon, the semi-diurnal arc of the star which will give the distance of the said degree in the ecliptic and from the meridian, and consequently the degree (if all under the meridian); the declination of the said culminating degree, and consequently its meridian altitude, with the angle of inclination of the ecliptic to the meridian: finally the arc of the ecliptic comprised between the said meridian and the horizon, and consequently the required co-ascending degree; and similarly for the co-descending degree: which things can be easily known separately and in order by the planisphere as will be seen for each in its place, but are too long-winded when all taken together for the practice of this proposition. XXII. PROPOSITION. To find the Oriental or Occidental Zenith of the Sun or of the Stars. By the *Zenith* in this place, we mean the arc of the horizon from the point where the sun and stars rise and set, to the true East or West. Therefore, it should be noted that among the Azimuths, there are two principal ones: namely the Meridian, and the one that passes from the true East through our Zenith to the true West, which we have named the Equinoctial Azimuth, which with the Meridian divides our hemisphere and the oblique horizon into four quadrants, which are divided into ninety degrees, of which the numbers commonly commence from the Equinoctial Azimuth, extending towards the South or North, up to ninety degrees.

[Finding the Zenith of the Sun or Stars]
To know this Zenith, place the degree of the Sun or the extremity of the star on the Eastern or Western horizon. The vertical circles, called Azimuths, will show you their distances from the true East or West, starting from the true equinoctial Azimuth, both from the East and West, according to the value of each interval of the said Azimuths that follow. EXAMPLE: Wanting to know how far the Eastern Zenith of the 5th degree of Taurus is, I place the said degree on the oblique horizon in the East. Then I count from the equinoctial Azimuth to the place where the said degree is, drawing it towards the North, where I find approximately the space of two Azimuths in the table where they are each described as 10 degrees. By this means, I know the distance between the point or place of the said degree and the true East to be about 15 degrees in the Eastern quarter of the North, which is the Zenith of the Sun when it is at this degree. One must proceed similarly to find the Zenith of the West in the Western part of our horizon.

[Understanding Zenith and Amplitude]
And it must be understood (as has been said) that if the said parts fall between the equinoctial and the Arctic pole, they are septentrional (northern), and outside, they are meridional (southern). I find this term "Eastern or Western Zenith" rather inappropriate. What Jacquinot means to speak of is what is called ortive amplitude or ascensional difference, and it is to be considered that in all places the two great circles that we have named the meridian or properly vertical circle (which Jacquinot calls the equinoctial Azimuth, because in Astrolabes the said vertical circle is one of the Azimuths, passing through the Zenith of the place and through the two equinoctial points) divide the horizon into four principal points, namely South, North, East, and West. And that in the right sphere where the pole is on the horizon, the ascensional difference or ortive amplitude of the stars is their declination, but in every other oblique sphere, the said difference or ortive amplitude is different according to the greater or lesser obliquity, and moreover, it changes daily according to the movement of the stars: sensibly and apparently, as with the Sun and the Moon; and slowly and imperceptibly, as with the stars. And what is understood by this Eastern Zenith, or rather by this ascensional difference and ortive amplitude, is the arc of the horizon comprised between the true points of East or West, and the point where the star rises and sets in the Sphere, whether towards South or towards North. And therefore, this difference and amplitude is of four kinds, namely: Eastern Meridional and Septentrional; and Western Meridional and Septentrional. For example, the six northern signs of the Zodiac all have Septentrional ortive amplitude, and the six southern signs have Meridional. It must be added: comprised between the points on the horizon (where the said degree of the Sun or star is placed) and the vertical circle, or equinoctial Azimuth.

[Alternative Method with the Planisphere]
OTHERWISE. By the general Planisphere. By our general Planisphere, this proposition is very easy. For, the rule being situated under the latitude of the proposed place, and having marked on its alidade the point where it cuts the parallel of the Sun or of the star, transferring the said rule onto the equinoctial, the same point will mark between the meridians (then serving as vertical circles or Azimuths), counting from the right meridian, the quantity of the ortive amplitude of the Sun or of the said star, which will be Septentrional if the parallel is Septentrional, and Meridional if Meridional. For example, having set the rule under the latitude of Paris, and marked a point where it cuts the parallel of the 5th degree of Taurus, which is Septentrional, the said rule transferred onto the right or equinoctial horizon, I see that the said point falls around the 20th meridian, counting from the right meridian. And therefore, I say that such is the Septentrional ortive amplitude of the 5th degree of Taurus.

[Finding the Zenith of Altitude]
XXIII. PROPOSITION. To know the Zenith of the height of the Sun or stars. Between the Zenith of heights and the Oriental or Occidental, there is such a difference that the one of heights is not taken at rising or setting like the other, but only when the Sun or stars are elevated above our horizon, and it shows how far they are from one of the 4 quarters and in which of them, which is found in this manner: Take by the back of the Astrolabe the altitude of the Sun or of the star whose Zenith of height you wish to know, by directing its degree onto the Almicantaraths at the same altitude that you have found. Then observe over how many Azimuths the said degree or star will fall, counting from the equinoctial Azimuth to the Azimuth on which it is found. This will show you its Zenith and in which quarter and distance, which will be Oriental Septentrional, or Oriental Austral; Occidental Septentrional, or Occidental Austral. EXAMPLE: On April 15th, the Sun being elevated 40 degrees, I place its degree (which is the 5th of Taurus) between the Almicantaraths at its height on the Eastern side, and I find its Zenith of height within the Azimuths of 30 degrees, in the Eastern quarter of the south. And thus, one must do for the stars, by taking their heights and disposing them like the degree of the Sun. What Jacquinot means by this word "Zenith of heights" is the Azimuth or the vertical circle passing through our Zenith and through the body of some star elevated above our horizon, such as the Sun or the stars; which vertical circle determines in which part of the world the said star is found with respect to the 4 cardinal points of South, North, East, and West, which is what this proposition teaches to find by the Astrolabe.

[Alternative Method with the Universal Planisphere]
OTHERWISE. By the Universal Planisphere. The same thing that Jacquinot teaches in this proposition will be found by our universal planispheric, as follows: By the practice we have taught in the 22nd proposition, by situating the rule in its place, and forming a triangle whose summit falls on the parallel of declination of the Sun or of some star, in such a way that the said rule being transferred under the equinoctial, the said summit of the triangle falls on the parallel of the height found (otherwise, it would be necessary to reiterate and form other triangles); for in this second situation of the rule, the summit of the said triangle will be found on a similar Azimuth or vertical circle as that on which the Sun or star was at the time of your observation, and the quantity of meridians comprised between the right meridian and that on which the said summit of the triangle is stopped, will show how far the Sun or the said star was distant from the true East or West. EXAMPLE: On the said day, April 15th, the Sun being at the 5th degree, almost 40 minutes of Aries, I take in the morning the height of 38 degrees, about 40 minutes. And having situated the rule according to the elevation of the pole, and formed on the said points marked on it a triangle, whose summit falling in this situation of the rule on the parallel of the Sun (which is of 9 degrees and about 50 minutes), the said rule transferred onto the right horizon, I find it stopped on the said height found of 38 degrees 40 minutes. In the first situation of the rule, the said summit is given between the hourly circles 9 hours 20 minutes; and in the second, it is given between the same circles, considered as vertical (counting from the right vertical), the Azimuth of the Sun of 35 degrees 50 minutes; and such is its distance from the true East, of which the complement, 54 degrees 50 minutes, is its distance from the south. NOTE: It will be remarked here in passing that, following the ancient calendar, the 5th of Taurus being elevated 40 degrees above the horizon of Paris, will also be found at an Eastern amplitude of 30 horizontal degrees, as Jacquinot has shown, and not 18, as David Robert and others have supposed in the second and third impressions.

[Finding World Directions with Astrolabe]
XXIIII. PROPOSITION, To know in all countries and regions the four parts of the world, namely East, West, South, and North. You can know this in several and diverse ways. Firstly, by a small quadrant with a needle, which can be placed on the back of the Astrolabe, such that the line and southern part of this quadrant are directly aligned with the meridian of the Astrolabe towards the ring: then one must turn the said Astrolabe (which should be laid equidistant from the horizon) with the quadrant, until the movable needle responds to the fixed line. Then the curved extremity of the small needle (which always points to the Arctic pole) will show us the Northern part, and similarly the line of the Astrolabe, extending from this part to the opposite, the Southern part. Likewise, the 6-hour line of the said quadrant, both in the East and in the West, with the transversal line of the Astrolabe, which passes through the center, shows us the East and the West: namely, the left side is East, and the right side is West; assuming that the face and ring of the Astrolabe are turned towards the South. The practice of this is easy, and can be done at all times.

[Finding Directions with a Gnomon]
ALTERNATIVELY, You can draw a circle, and at its center erect perpendicularly a rod, smaller than the semi-diameter of the circle: and you will observe in the morning when the extremity of its shadow touches the circumference of the circle as it enters, which you will mark with some note. Similarly, after midday, you will note the point where it leaves the circle, then you must find the midpoint of the arc comprised between the two notes, and draw a line that passes through the said midpoint and through the center to the opposite part of the said circle; this line will show on one side the South, and on the other the North; and the line that will be drawn through the center of the circle, cutting the aforesaid at right angles, will show on one side the East, and on the other the West, as appears by this figure.

[Figure for Gnomon Method]
Figure for the Gnomon Method. C D is the rod. B is the point before noon. A is the point after noon.

[Finding Directions with Astrolabe Azimuths]
AFTERWARDS follows another method which properly belongs to the Astrolabe, which can be practiced by the Azimuths, which divide (as has been said) our hemisphere into four quadrants, each of 90 degrees, which are similarly understood on the back of the Astrolabe, namely the quadrant which is from the left extremity of the transversal line called horizon, up to the midday line next to the Armilla, represents to us the Eastern Southern quadrant: and from this Armilla up to the right extremity of the transversal line, demonstrates the Western Southern: The subsequent up to the midnight line, is called the Western Northern quadrant: and the last from this midnight line up to the left part of this transversal, represents to us the Eastern Northern quadrant: provided that you have the face and the Armilla turned towards the South. To observe the said parts, take the height of the sun at whatever hour you wish, then place the degree of the sun at a similar height among the Almicantaraths, considering in which quadrant it will fall among the Azimuths, and at what distance from the beginning of the quadrants, namely on which of the said Azimuths: then lay the Astrolabe on its face, and place the rule in a similar quadrant and height as the sun was found among the Almicantaraths, making the shadow of the pinnules equidistant and straight according to the rule: then you will have the four parts of the world by the four extremities of the two diametral lines of the back, namely South by the line extending from the center towards the ring, and North opposite: East and West, by the transversal line.

[Example: Finding Directions with Astrolabe]
EXAMPLE. On the fifteenth of April, the sun being in the 5th degree of Taurus, I take its height above the horizon, which I find to be 40 degrees before noon. This being placed among the Almicantaraths, I find this degree to fall on the 30th Azimuth in the eastern northern quadrant. This done, I lay the Astrolabe with its back up, equidistant from the horizon, so that the line drawn from the center to the armilla is towards the southern part: then I place the rule in a similar quadrant and degrees as the sun was among the Azimuths, namely on the 30th of the transversal line in the East, extending towards the North, and I turn the Astrolabe (the rule remaining fixed) until the shadow of the pinnules responds and is equidistant to the lines of the rule. Then the line from the center extending to the armilla shows me the southern part, and its opposite the northern, and the extremity of the transversal line, which is on the left side, the true East, as the other part, the West: provided that the face of the man and the armilla of the Astrolabe are turned towards the South.

[Critique of Meridian Line Methods]
This first method of finding the meridian line by the magnetic needle presupposes the practice of the second method, and is subordinate to it as a direct dependence thereof; and although the said second method can be practiced differently, nevertheless what Jacquinot says may suffice. But these are different things: the meridian line of a magnetic needle and the true meridian line. This latter, once exactly found and marked, it is easy to examine the other, and having recognized the difference, one must mark it in the compass box, so that whenever one needs to quickly trace a meridian line, and do what Jacquinot wants to teach with the Astrolabe, one only has to apply the said box, quadrant or compass, whose side will represent the said meridian line when the needle is arrested on this marked line of difference. Here one can recognize the impertinence of those good Doctors who procured the second impression of Jacquinot, for instead of a rod smaller than the semi-diameter of the circle, they made it equal, which David Robert having followed, he took occasion to criticize Jacquinot, and to say that this rod equal to the radius of the circle would be useless for a good part of the year, until the meridian height of the Sun was greater than 45 degrees, and by a sensible excess, so that at two different hours, equidistant one before and the other after midday, the shadow of the said rod could terminate at the circle described.

[Improved Gnomon Method]
We say then that for the promptness of the operation it would be appropriate to describe several circles from the same center at some distance from each other, and on the said center to erect perpendicularly a rod of average size, between the semi-diameter of the said circles, so that the extremity of the shadow can be promptly recognized to terminate at one of them, which will serve for the second observation after midday. But it is first necessary to take this precaution, which neither Jacquinot nor Robert have remarked. That is, the surface on which this observation is to be made must be level and parallel to the horizon, otherwise it would be useless if the rod were perfectly perpendicular to it, which you will judge to be so when its extremity is found to be equally distant from the circles described from the same center on which it is erected. And inasmuch as this observation is one of the first, principal, and fundamental of all astronomical observations, and it is very important that it be made exactly, we will say further, to remark the difficulty encountered in drawing the meridian line through the center, when there is an attached rod, that it is

[Meridian Line Accuracy]
Sometimes it is more appropriate, after having traced the plane of the dial and drawn several circles from the same center, to attach to the said center a piece of iron wire or brass sharpened to a point, and to solder it in such a way that the extremity of its point precisely corresponds to the said center. This will happen when, with a compass, you see that it is equally distant from all parts of one of the described circles. For the extremity of its shadow being marked on the same circle before and after midday, it will be easy to cut the arc comprised between the two marks in two, equally, by a line that will pass exactly through the center: and such a line will be the meridian line. But above all, it will be noted that such a practice and observation of the meridian line cannot be practiced precisely and without some error, however imperceptible, every day of the year, because the Sun's declination varies more or less from one hour to another, more noticeably near the equinoxes and less near the solstices. And inasmuch as at the winter solstice the Sun's altitudes are doubtful and less exact, due to the inequality of the air, sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner, which also causes sometimes more, sometimes less refraction; the safest will be to make such observations at the summer solstice to establish it as a certain foundation for all other observations; even for the declination of the magnetic needle, because then, for the space of 7 or 8 days, the Sun's declination being almost invariable, it cannot cause any difference, and the Sun is not subject to refraction for about two-thirds of the day. This third method is more fallacious than the preceding ones, and can only be approximate, not precise, inasmuch as between the observation and the direction of the Astrolabe, as Jacquinot teaches, there is time, during which the Sun can have changed its Azimuth, so that this practice can roughly give the four cardinal directions, but not a meridian line, nor the true points of East and West.

[Universal Planisphere Method]
This third method of practice is nothing else on our universal Planisphere than what we have said in the last preceding proposition, since it is only a question of finding the Azimuth, and it can also be practiced with the stars.

[Recognizing Stars at Night]
You must, by the 10th, know their rising, and their eastern Zenith by the 22nd. Then, at a certain hour examined by a well-regulated clock, you will arrange the Astrolabe (as we have shown for the four cardinal directions). Afterwards, you will direct the rule of the back towards the point of the horizon where one of the stars marked on your Rete should rise, and that star which you will then see elevated through the pinholes of the sights above your horizon will be the one you are looking for, which you must observe by the figure of the stars near it, or another sign, so that by it you can know the hour of the night, and the other unknown stars. Likewise, you can do this when the star sets, though not as conveniently, because it separates from our sight. Wanting to know the star Spica Virginis, I look through the Astrolabe for the hour it should rise, and in which quadrant or part of the world. Then I go to an open place, arranging my Astrolabe according to the four cardinal directions, as per the preceding proposition, and directing my back rule to the corresponding degree of the quadrant where the star should rise: then looking through the pinholes of the sights, that bright and sparkling star that I then perceive rising above our horizon, I am certain that it is the one whose knowledge I seek.

[Alternative Star Identification Method]
Alternatively, in the evening when the sun has set, set the rule at some certain hour, observed by a clock, as before: and with the small rule placed at the hour, turn your zodiac until the degree of the Sun falls at the place of the fixed rule. Then look in the Astrolabe for the star you wish to know in the sky, at how many degrees of the Almicantaraths it has in height, and in which part, Oriental or Occidental. Afterwards, take the rule of the back, and place it at as many degrees, in the circles of height on the back, as the star had in altitude in the Almicantaraths; then hang your Astrolabe by its handle, and look at the sky in that part where the star was found, towards East or West; and the brightest and most apparent star that you will see exactly at the place of the two sights will be the one you are looking for. EXAMPLE: On June 4th, wanting to know the star Spica Virginis, at ten o'clock in the evening, taken by a clock, I direct the rule and the degree of the Sun (which is the 22nd of Gemini) to that hour: and the Rete thus arranged, I find among the Almicantaraths, the star elevated by 25 degrees in the Western part: therefore I arrange the rule of the back at such a height; and I turn towards the Western part, until by this arrangement I can perceive a bright star which I say is Spica Virginis. Furthermore, you will be able to easily recognize the stars that are in the Zodiac, or those that do not have great latitude, by knowing which night, and at what hour the moon should come near them, which is known by the lines and degrees of both, by the ephemerides, or other tables. Wanting to know the star Cor Leonis, I observe by the ephemerides, or almanacs, when the Moon will be in the sign of Leo, around the 22nd degree: and the star that I see that night very bright near it, I infallibly judge to be Cor Leonis. And by this means you will also come to the knowledge of the planets, which, well observed, you can also recognize several unknown stars. Of these two methods, this second one seems much more appropriate than the first, indeed, the first cannot even be practiced except by this one: inasmuch as it is almost impossible to recognize, or even perceive stars at their rising or setting, as much because of the inequality of the earth and obstructions of some mountains, trees, or buildings, as principally because of the ordinary vapors and clouds that almost always appear above our horizon, so that this horizon point of their rising having passed, it is necessary to seek them at their height above the horizon by this second method: and if it happens that two stars in the sky are of almost similar height and magnitude of light near each other, the larger in appearance, and less brilliant, is one of the seven planets, and the brighter is the star you are looking for. This method of knowing fixed stars or planets is very uncertain, inasmuch as even if you have knowledge of the Moon's place in the Zodiac, or of some other planet by the Ephemerides; if you do not also have knowledge of their latitude, together with the longitude and latitude of the stars, you will labor in vain. Therefore, this method is not appropriate here.

[Universal Planisphere Star Recognition]
This proposition can also be practiced on our universal Planisphere, if you propose to know in the Sky some star marked on it. The rule placed at the correct height of the pole for your horizon, mark the parallel of declination of the said star, and forming a triangle with your rule, make its apex fall on the said parallel exactly at the place of the hour circle that is known to you, and the said rule being transferred to the equinoctial or straight horizon, note on which parallel of height the apex of the same triangle will fall, as well as on which vertical circle, or in which part of the world; thus the height

[Identifying a Star by its Altitude]
of the said star being known to you, and applying the rule over the same degree of altitude, if you present the Astrolabe towards the same part of the world, the star that you will perceive through the sights of the pinnules will be the one you have noted on the said planisphere, and of which you desire to have knowledge.

[Finding Other Stars from a Known Star]
After having identified one star by the preceding methods, you will easily recognize all the other stars described on the Astrolabe, by taking the altitude of the known star and placing it among the Almicantaraths. This done, observe the position of the star you wish to identify, that is, on which Almicantarath it lies, and in which part of the sky it is found. Then, from that part, look through the sights of the pinnules, and the brightest star among the others will be the one you are seeking. Thus, one known star will show you the hour at which the others rise, and by this means, you will see them rise, to know them more surely than by a clock. EXAMPLE: Wishing to know the star Cor Leonis, I take the altitude of Spica Virginis, which is known to me, and find it to be 30 degrees towards the East. Then, having placed it at its altitude among the Almicantaraths, I see the point of Cor Leonis fall on the 15th Almicantarath, after the meridian line. Therefore, I set the rule on the back to a similar altitude, and turn towards that part. The star I see at the end of the pinnules I judge to be Cor Leonis. You can do the same for others.

[On the Universal Planisphere]
This knowledge of the stars could be derived from the universal planisphere; but because its practice is too tedious on our instruments with only the rule and compass, we will pass over it here. For even with a universal planisphere equipped with its horizon, its quadrant of altitude, and its brachiolum with its movable pointer, this proposition would still be tedious to practice, unless there were as many movable pointers as there are marked stars, or at least two. But to tell the truth, I would not at all advise this research by the Astrolabe, except to gain knowledge of one or two. The easiest way is by some globe, on which, having marked those stars that will be known to you by the Astrolabe, or otherwise, having recognized in the Sky the common chariot, frequently seen, which are the seven stars of the tail of the Great Bear, and having marked them on the globe, you will compare them with the nearest stars in the Sky and on the said globe, and by the difference of their magnitude and situation, you will distinguish them, and by their names, such as they are marked and named on the said globe, and so forth, by these, you will recognize others.

[Identifying Stars Not on the Astrolabe]
This present canon, and several others (such as knowing the Sun's position without knowing the day, the latitude of fixed and erratic stars, or whether erratic stars are retrograde or direct, and in which mansion of the sky the Moon is) are of little utility and no certainty by the Astrolabe. Rather, they require proper and particular tables, calculated for this purpose, such as ephemerides and others, which is why we will abandon them and refrain from the present use, as Stophler has done, who among others has treated this matter amply and very learnedly. The knowledge of the planets depends entirely on the tables of their movements, such as ephemerides. If you wish to know them in order to distinguish them from the fixed stars, take their position in the Zodiac from the said ephemerides for the day and hour of your observation, and mark it either on the rete of your Astrolabe in the manner in which fixed stars are marked, or on a celestial globe. For the Astrolabe, you will practice the two preceding propositions described above; and for the globe, the comparison you will make of the nearest stars, both in the Sky and on the said globe, will give you knowledge of the planet you have set out to find.

[Critique of Bassantin's Astrolabe Amplifications]
It is with reason that Jacquinot and Stophler have rejected from the use of the Astrolabe certain propositions, such as those of Jacques Bassantin in his treatise on the amplification of the use of his Astrolabe. For besides the fact that the practice and operation of such propositions require some change and addition to the construction of common Astrolabes, the procedure is so tedious that the result can only be very doubtful and uncertain, which is confirmed by Bassantin himself, in that he requires a pole of the Zodiac marked on the rete, and an extension of the particular plates to include the complement of 8 Almicantaraths below, or, as he says, beyond the Tropic of Capricorn. For the first, we say that although the Pole of the Zodiac can be easily marked during the construction of the Astrolabe, it would nevertheless be almost useless for the operation, inasmuch as in small Astrolabes the width of the rule, called the alidade, would infallibly cover it, being too close to the center. And in larger ones, where this same thing would happen, or the said rule, lacking sufficient width, would be less suitable for a just and precise operation. For the second, we say that it is pure impertinence to think of amplifying the use of our common Astrolabes by an amplification or extension of the plates enclosed therein, which the limb cannot tolerate; or else such amplified plates will always be distinct and separate from the body of our said common Astrolabes. But in a word, Bassantin's propositions are such that he who could not have knowledge of them and could only practice them by the Astrolabe will never know anything, and will derive no fruit from them; and he who has knowledge of them from elsewhere will consider their practice on the Astrolabe not only useless and unfruitful, but purely ridiculous. Not that we consider what Bassantin says impossible; for just as the Astrolabe by its projection represents the sphere to us, so it is reasonably susceptible to all the encounters and questions that can be made on the sphere. We say further, envying Bassantin's amplification, that the solution of no spherical triangle will be impossible by the Astrolabe; but each mathematical instrument has its particular operations as its principal and proper functions to give satisfaction to the curious mind, otherwise there would be confusion.

[Finding the Sun's Position Without the Day]
It is indeed true, nevertheless, that the knowledge of the Sun's position is not impossible by the Astrolabe without knowing the day, as Jacquinot thought. For, firstly, by two meridian observations, one can know by the difference in altitudes in which half of the Zodiac the Sun is: namely, the ascending half from the Tropic of Capricorn through Aries to the Tropic of Cancer, if the last altitude was found to be greater than the first; or the descending half from the said Tropic of Cancer through Libra to Capricorn, if the contrary. So that at the time of the last observation, the rete being so turned that the said known half of the Zodiac passes over the meridian line between the Almicantaraths, the degree of the said half that is found to pass over the said line at an equal altitude to the last one found, will be the degree of the Sun on the day of the last observation. This known degree will give you in the calendar placed on the back of the Astrolabe, the corresponding day of the year; except for the necessary practice, explained above, for the leap year.

[Example: Unknown Day]
EXAMPLE: On some unknown day of the year, you take

[Determining Sun's Position from Meridian Altitude]
the said meridian altitude of the Sun, and you find it to be 37 degrees 51 minutes, and the following day you find it to be 37 degrees 17 minutes, you will first know from these two observations that the Sun is in the descending half of the Zodiac, since its meridian altitude has decreased since your first observation. Therefore, if you cause the alidade to pass over the meridian line between the almucantarats, the said descending half of the Zodiac from the Tropic of Cancer through Libra up to Capricorn, and you mark the degree of the said half passing over the said line with a similar almucantarat as that of the Sun's last altitude, namely 37 degrees 17 minutes, you will recognize it to be about the 9th degree 30 minutes of Libra. On this degree, on the back of the Astrolabe, placing the alidade, you will see it pass over the third day of October; for which, if it is a leap year, as in 1610, you will take the fourth of October; if in 1611, the third, plus a quarter; in 1612, the third plus half a day; and so on until the full day of the fourth leap year.

[Another Method: Sun's Position Without Knowing Day]
OTHERWISE. We will also perform this proposition on the small rectilinear dial. To know the Sun's place without knowing the day. This proposition will be practiced quite readily on the Astrolabe, 159, in this manner: take the Sun's meridian altitude on two different days to know if the Sun is in ascending or descending signs, as has been said, taking care in the second observation to turn the part of the Astrolabe where the said dial is drawn towards the Sun, for the alidade, showing the meridian altitude on the limb, will also show on one or the other meridian line of the said dial the Sun's parallel, by the point where it intersects them. EXAMPLE. In the preceding example, having found the Sun at noon at an altitude of 37 degrees 51 minutes in the first observation, and 37 degrees 17 minutes in the second, the rule remaining in the same state, you will see that it will cut the lower meridian line at a point, and you will say that it is a descending sign, and therefore about the 9th degree and 30 minutes of the said sign of Libra.

[XXVIII. PROPOSITION: Sun's Distance from Zenith]
XXVIII. PROPOSITION. To observe daily how far the Sun is from our Zenith. To do this, there are two ways, one of which is particular and refers only to places for which tables are made on the Astrolabe, and the other is universal. So, if you wish to know the distance of the Sun to the zenith by the first method, place its degree on the meridian line, at the table made for your elevation, and count between the almucantarats from your zenith to the said degree, thus you will have the difference. By the second, which is general, it can be done at noon or any other hour of the day; for by subtracting the Sun's altitude at noon from 90 degrees, the distance between the zenith and the Sun will remain. Similarly, at all other hours, by subtracting the Sun's altitude from 90 degrees, you will find the said distance of the Sun to our zenith. EXAMPLE. I find the Sun's altitude at noon to be 42 degrees, which I have subtracted from 90, and 48 degrees remain, which is the distance of the Sun to our zenith that day. Thus you can do the same for fixed stars, by taking their meridian altitudes and subtracting them from 90 degrees. There is indeed a great difference, as we have previously remarked on the 5th proposition of this present treatise, between knowing on the Astrolabe and observing by the Astrolabe the vertical distance of the Sun. The first is free to us at all hours, day and night, provided we have a proper and particular plate for each proposed place. The second requires the presence of the Sun and its ray with the observation of its altitude on the horizon, for which an infinity of mathematical instruments can serve, and in any place whatsoever. For this, I find that Jacquinot has forgotten to give his method of knowing the said vertical or zenith distance at any hour other than noon, which is nothing other than knowing the Sun's altitude on the horizon at any hour of the day, for one is the complement of the other, which is greatly useful for the construction of various scioteric instruments, such as rings, cylinders, quadrants, and others which are constructed by the reason of shadows according to the various altitudes of the Sun at each proposed hour, which we will supply here as follows: Let the rule or alidade be placed on the proposed hour, and under its sidereal line let the proposed degree for the Sun's place in the Zodiac be moved and stopped, and mark on which almucantarat it will be found, for the number of these almucantarats comprised between the said degree of the Sun and the zenith will be the distance of the Sun from the said zenith; therefore, the complement (namely, the number of the said almucantarats comprised between the said place of the Sun and the oblique horizon of the proposed place) will be the Sun's altitude on the horizon at the said proposed hour; which having observed for all the degrees of the Zodiac, or at least for the principal divisions in each sign, as for every five, ten, or fifteen degrees, one will have tables for the construction of the said scioteric instruments. But before giving an example of this operation, it will be remarked here that just as this proposition can serve for several instruments by means of the Sun's altitudes known for all hours of each proposed day, so also the preceding proposition can serve for the construction of quadrants or dials in which either the extremity of the gnomon or its common intersection with the Sun's parallels shows the hours, the construction of which depends on the knowledge of the Sun's azimuth at each proposed hour, that is to say, by how many horizontal degrees each vertical circle passing through our zenith and through the center of the Sun, being in each hourly circle, is distant from the meridian, which having observed for each degree of the Zodiac and for each hour of the day, one will have tables for the construction of the said quadrants. EXAMPLE. For example, then, of both, if you wish to know what the Sun's altitude on the horizon of Paris should be, and what its azimuth or horizontal distance from the meridian at 10 o'clock in the morning, or 2 hours after noon, on the 8th day of April, the Sun being in the 19th degree of Aries. Having placed the rule on the said 10 o'clock in the morning, and having moved and stopped the said 19th degree of Aries there, you see that it falls between the 41st and 42nd almucantarats, namely on 41 degrees and 36 minutes, and such should be the Sun's altitude at the said hour, as you can also know that the said degree also falls between the 41st and 42nd azimuths, namely on 41 degrees and about 50 minutes: and this is the horizontal distance from noon that the Sun should have at the same proposed hour. Which will also be found to agree for 2 hours after noon. The same by the Universal Planisphere.

[Constructing Altitude and Azimuth Tables]
This instrument is singular for the construction of the aforesaid tables of altitudes and azimuthal distances of the Sun at each proposed hour, and for any given place. For the horizontal rule, being fixed on the degree corresponding to the polar elevation of the proposed place, such as for Paris on the 48th degree 45 minutes, counting from each pole to the equinoctial; and having marked the degree of the Sun, and its parallel of declination, if one forms a triangle whose apex falls precisely on the intersection of the said parallel with the circle of the proposed hour, the said rule being transferred to the equinoctial or right horizon, the apex of the said triangle will fall precisely, between the parallels or circles of altitudes, on the Sun's altitude at the proposed hour, counting from the equinoctial between the meridians or vertical circles, counting from the largest and outermost, is the required Azimuth. Thus, the Sun being at the 15th degree of Leo, around the 7th day of July, it will be found to have an altitude above the horizon of Paris, at 8 o'clock in the morning, of about 43 degrees 20 minutes, and its vertical circle will be distant from the meridian by about 67 horizontal degrees.

[Finding Declination of Sun and Stars]
XXIX. PROPOSITION. To know each day by how many degrees the Sun, or other stars, declines from the equinoctial. Declination is taken from the equinoctial towards one or the other pole of the world, for which reason one is northern, and the other southern: and the greatest does not exceed 90 degrees. Therefore, to discern it, one must place the degree of the Sun on the Meridian line in one of the tables of the Astrolabe, and the degrees of the Almicantaraths which are from the equinoctial up to the said degree of the Sun will show its northern declination, if it falls within the equinoctial towards the arctic pole: or southern, if the degree falls outside the equinoctial, moving towards the Tropic of Capricorn. EXAMPLE, I wish to know the declination of the Sun, being at the 5th degree of Taurus, I place that degree on the Meridian line, and find its declination to be 15 degrees, counting from the equinoctial up to the said degree. Then I say that this declination is northern, because it falls within the equinoctial towards the center of the Astrolabe.

[Table of Solar Declinations]
Table of the Sun's declinations. Degrees, Minutes. Degrees, Minutes. Degrees, Minutes. 0 0 0. 11 30 20. 12 30. 1 0 24. 11 51 10. 25 29. 2 0 28. 12 11 20. 37 28. 3 1 11. 121 35. 21 49 17. 4 5 1. 22 12 53. 21 0 26. 5 1 0. 13 13 21. 11 5. 6 1 13. 13 33 21. 22 54. 7 1 47. 13 53 21. 51 43. 8 3 11. 14 13 21. 42 22. 9 10 11 31. 14 31 12. 51 21. 20 5. 10 58 1 14. 31 22 0. 23 4. 11 11 25. 10 22 9. 19 11. 12 4 45. 15 31 22. 17 18. 13 15 5. 9 15. 47 3. 25 17. 14 11 5. 31 16. 5 22. 31 16. 15 25 5. 51 15. 23 22. 39 15. 16 6 16. 40 22. 46 14. 17 17 6. 41 16. 57 22. 52 13. 18 18 7. 5 17. 11 22. 57 12. 19 20 7. 18 17. 31 23. 3 11. 20 10 7. 50 17. 47 23. 7 11. 21 8 13. 18. 3 23. 12 9. 22 21 8. 55 18. 19 23. 15 8. 23 15 8. 58 18. 35 23. 19 7. 24 19 9. 20 18. 49 23. 22 6. 25 42 19. 4 23. 15 16. 26 10 14. 19. 18 23. 13 17. 27 4 17. 10. 26 19. 31 23. 17 3. 28 18 10. 47 19. 46 23. 28 2. 29 11 30. 11. 9 19. 59 23. 19 1. 30 11 30. 20. 12 23. 30 0. X sep 1 oa ~si

[Another Table of Solar Declinations]
Another Table of the Sun's declinations. Degrees, Minutes, Seconds. Degrees, Minutes, Seconds. Degrees, Minutes, Seconds. 0 0 0 0. 11 30 42. 20 13 22 30. 1 0 23 59. 11 51 48. 20 25 57 19. 2 0 47 53. 12 12 40. 20 38 9 28. 3 1 11 45. 12 33 11. 20 50 0 27. 4 1 35 43. 12 53 49. 21 1 55 26. 5 1 59 37. 13 14 5. 21 11 19 15. 6 1 23 28. 13 34 7. 21 19 7 14. 7 2 47 16. 13 53 57. 21 33 16 13. 8 3 11 4. 14 13 31. 21 45 15 12. 9 3 34 47. 14 32 55. 21 52 42 11. 10 3 58 28. 14 52 0. 22 4 45 10. 11 4 22 4. 15 10 50. 22 10 22 9. 12 4 45 37. 15 29 26. 22 18 35 8. 13 5 9 5. 15 47 47. 22 26 22 7. 14 5 32 29. 16 5 5. 22 33 44 6. 15 5 55 47. 16 23 39. 22 40 39 5. 16 6 18 58. 16 41 51. 22 47 10 4. 17 6 41 6. 16 58 22. 22 53 13 3. 18 7 5 9. 17 15 18. 22 58 51 2. 19 7 28 0. 17 31 54. 23 4 3 1. 20 7 50 46. 17 48 14. 23 8 47 0. 21 8 13 26. 18 4 14. 23 13 5 9. 22 8 35 53. 18 19 5. 23 16 56 8. 23 8 58 29. 18 35 18. 23 20 20 7. 24 9 20 51. 18 50 21. 23 23 18 6. 25 9 42 41. 19 5 4. 23 25 45 5. 26 10 4 3. 19 15 16. 23 27 51 4. 27 10 26 11. 19 33 27. 23 29 27 3. 28 10 48 2. 19 47 7. 23 30 35 2. 29 11 9 17. 20 0 26. 23 31 17 1. 30 11 30 4. 20 13 22. 23 31 30 0. X sip 1 oa ~si

[Using Declination Tables for Stars]
Similarly, you can judge the stars, by directing their point on the Meridian line, and counting from the equinoctial, as we have done for the Sun's degree. And because this present proposition is very useful for helping to know the latitudes of the fixed stars, we have added a small table of the Sun's declination, by which one will know this declination more accurately than by the Astrolabe. The Use of the said Table: After having found the degree of the Sun, to know its declination, one must find the sign of the Sun, at the top or bottom of the table, according to how its name or character is written, and the number of its degrees, either on the side of the table (if the said sign is at the front of it) or if it is found at the foot of the table, one must take the number on the right side. This done, by proceeding to the common angle, corresponding to the said sign and degree, the degrees and minutes of the Sun's declination will be found, which will be Northern if the Sun is in one of the first six signs, namely, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo: Or Southern if it is in one of the last six, such as Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.

[Astrolabe Declination Practice]
Moreover, the practice of this proposition regarding the Sun is much quicker and easier with our small Astrolabes, for the rule being placed and fixed on the proposed day found in the Calendar on the back, it will likewise be fixed on the Sun's place in the Zodiac, and on the degree of its declination: so that at the same time it will show you both, notwithstanding that the said declination of the Sun is only placed in the upper part of our Astrolabe, opposite the Northern Signs, starting from each of the equinoctial points of Aries and Libra, ending on both sides at the solstitial point of Cancer: For just as in the entire Zodiac two points or degrees equally distant from one or the other equinox, or diametrically opposed, have equal declination, so also the rule being placed on any degree of the Zodiac, will always show its declination in the circle of declinations, which will be called Northern for the degrees of the Northern Signs and Southern for the Southern ones. Thus on the 15th day of May the Sun will be found at the 24th degree and about 40 minutes of Taurus, and to have 15 degrees of Northern declination: and on February 11th the Sun being at the 14th degree and about 10 minutes of Aquarius or Water-bearer, will be found to have about 15 degrees 30 minutes of Southern declination, which is equal to the Northern declination of the opposite degree, 24 degrees 10 minutes of Leo. We have added the table of declinations of Jacquinot following the ancient calculation, that of Tycho Brahe is more accurate and precise, although its practice does not differ in any way from what Jacquinot says of his own.

[Declination on the Universal Planisphere]
OTHERWISE On the General Planisphere. This 29th proposition is also very quick, simple, and easy to practice on the universal planisphere, having knowledge of the Sun's place on the proposed day: For counting the parallels comprised between the equinoctial and the said place of the Sun, this same number is the number of degrees of its declination. Similarly, the number of the said parallels comprised between the said equinoctial and any proposed star, marked however on the said planisphere, gives the number of degrees of its declination. XXX. PROPOSITION.

[Finding Latitude or Pole Elevation]
To know in all places where one may be, how much latitude or elevation of the pole there is. Latitude of a place (in this regard) is the distance from the equinoctial to the zenith of the meridian, which is measured in degrees of the meridian circle. This can be found in various ways, the easiest of which is by the meridian altitude of the sun when it is at the beginning of Aries or Libra. For by subtracting this altitude from 90 degrees, the distance from our zenith to the equinoctial remains, which is the latitude of the place where we are, always equal to the elevation of the pole above the horizon. EXAMPLE: In the year 1540, on March 10th, the sun entered the first degree of Aries at noon. We observed its meridian altitude within the city of Paris, which we found to be 48 degrees and about 20 minutes. Subtracting this from 90 degrees, there remain 41 degrees and 40 minutes, which is the true latitude of the said place. But if on the day one wishes to observe this latitude, the Sun has some declination, as happens in other signs and degrees: After having observed its meridian altitude, one must know the declination of its degree, by the preceding proposition: and if it is northern, it must be subtracted from the altitude of the Sun taken at noon: if southern, it must be added. This will give the altitude of the equinoctial, which, subtracted from 90 degrees, will leave the latitude of that place where we are making such observations. EXAMPLE: On April 14th, we found in Paris that the 4th degree of Taurus had 11 degrees and 55 minutes of declination towards the northern part, and that the altitude of the sun at noon was 54 degrees and 15 minutes. From this, we subtract the declination, which is 11 degrees and 55 minutes, so there remains 42 degrees and 20 minutes, which is the altitude of the equinoctial. I subtract this from 90 degrees, and there remains 48 degrees and 40 minutes for the latitude of this city of Paris, where we made this observation. This proposition is fundamental to all others, both preceding and following, and depends absolutely on observation. The more exact and precise it is, the more just and precise will be what we seek; but if it is crude and imprecise, however easy, it will render what we seek crude, imprecise, and less approaching the truth. This is why we will examine the two methods of observation that this author provides. For the meridian altitude of the Sun at the beginning of Aries and Libra, it is a rare occurrence that the Sun, being at these beginnings, meets the meridian in some place; that is to say, that it enters these equinoctial points precisely at noon. So if it is outside these points, it will infallibly have more or less declination, the more or less it is distant from them. And as its declination changes greatly and precipitously near these equinoctial points, it is also very rare to be able to make and practice this first method justly and exactly. The second method, which is by the meridian altitude of the Sun having some declination, to come to the knowledge of the elevation of the pole, depends on the knowledge of the true place of the Sun and its true declination at the time of observation; which is almost impossible to know justly without the aid of proper Tables or Ephemerides precisely calculated, or at least reduced to the meridian of the place of observation. Therefore, for surer and more exact methods, we will present three principal ones here. The first, by means of the Sun, being at the tropics, principally at that of Cancer, and therefore at its greatest declination, which in these places remains invariable for a few days at least in degrees and minutes, and therefore insensibly different. Taking then the meridian altitude of the Sun, being at the said tropic of Cancer, and from it subtracting the greatest declination, the remainder will be the altitude of the equinoctial, which subtracted from 90 degrees will give the latitude or polar elevation of the place of observation. In Paris, if you take the meridian altitude of the Sun as 64 degrees 46 minutes, subtracting 23 degrees 31 minutes for the greatest declination according to the most accurate calculation of Tycho Brahe, there remains 41 degrees 15 minutes of equinoctial elevation, which subtracted from 90 leaves 48 degrees 45 minutes of pole elevation. A second method is by means of some star whose declination is known; for taking its altitude when it passes the meridian, and from this altitude subtracting the declination of the star if it is Northern (which is the surest case) or adding it if the star is Southern: in the one case the sum, in the other the remainder, will be the equinoctial altitude, which subtracted, as said, from 90 degrees, gives the altitude or polar elevation of the place of observation. The third and most exact method of all is by means of circumpolar stars, of which we see the entire revolution around the pole, and which never set below our horizon, and principally of that which is closest to the pole, as in these Northern countries, the polar star called Cynosure. Choosing a proper night, that is, during which it passes twice below the meridian (which will occur every day from December 15th to January 15th in these times). For taking the altitude above the horizon at both passages below the meridian, and adding these two altitudes together, taking half of the total, this will be the just altitude of the pole above the horizon. On January 15th, in the year 1611, in the evening around 7:30, we found in Paris the said polar star to be 51 degrees 18 minutes high; and the next morning at the same hour we found it to be 46 degrees 1 minute high. These two altitudes joined together are 97 degrees 19 minutes and 18 seconds, of which half, 48 degrees 45 minutes and about 9 seconds, is the most accurate altitude of the pole above the horizon of Paris. We have deemed it appropriate for the less advanced to add here the two following propositions, inasmuch as their knowledge and practice can be very useful to them. To know in any place the altitude or elevation of the equinoctial. This proposition consists only of one word, which is to subtract the altitude of the pole, found by the last preceding proposition, from the number of 90 degrees, that is to say, from the entire quadrant of a circle, and the remainder will be the altitude of the equinoctial, inasmuch as the two altitudes assembled compose the entire quadrant of a circle, and one is the complement of the other. For example, the 48 degrees 45 minutes found by the preceding proposition for the altitude of the Pole in Paris, being subtracted from 90 degrees, the remainder amounting to 41 degrees 15 minutes, gives the altitude of the equinoctial for Paris; and this equinoctial altitude thus found and known by observation serves greatly for the true knowledge of many other propositions, but particularly for the following proposition: The equinoctial altitude of a place being known, to verify and certainly know the declinations of the Sun and the stars. Let the meridian altitude of the Sun or of some star be taken by the 5th proposition, and let the number of degrees and minutes of this altitude be compared with the number of degrees and minutes of equinoctial elevation. That is to say, let the smaller number be subtracted from the larger, and the remainder or the difference of the one from the other will be the required declination. EXAMPLE.

[Solar Declination in Paris]
In Paris, the equinoctial elevation being known as 41 degrees 25 minutes, on the 15th day of May, I take the Sun's meridian altitude, which I find to be 60 degrees 15 minutes. From this, subtracting the 41 degrees 25 minutes of equinoctial elevation, the remainder, 19 degrees, will be the Sun's declination, which will be called Northern, the meridian altitude having exceeded the equinoctial altitude. But it would be Southern when it is found to be less.

[Corollary: Finding Sun's Position from Declination]
By this known declination, you can know the Sun's place in the table of declinations, or on your Astrolabe, even, if necessary, come to know the day of observation that you will find to be the 15th of May, the Sun being at the 24th degree 40 minutes of Taurus. The same applies to the stars; for the one you will have found to have 50 degrees of meridian altitude will infallibly have 8 degrees 45 minutes of declination.

[Finding Longitude by Lunar Eclipse]
By the longitude of a place, we presently understand the distance from the meridian of the Fortunate Isles, extending towards the East, up to the Meridian of that place, which must be counted within the degrees of the equinoctial, or other parallels: but the longitude of one city to another is the difference of their two meridians, comprised in the degrees of the equinoctial. Therefore, it must be understood that Ptolemy, among other Cosmographers, observed a large part of the longitudes of several cities and regions, which are easy to find in his Geography: but when in some places the longitude is unknown, it is appropriate to know at what time a future eclipse of the Moon should begin in one of the places of known longitude. Then, in the place of unknown longitude, on the day that the said eclipse is to occur, you observe with the Astrolabe at what hour it will begin: for if it begins at the same hour that one finds by calculation it should begin in the place of known longitude, it would be manifest that these places would be of the same longitude: but if it begins earlier or later, there will be a difference according to the variety of time that will be found, as if it began one hour earlier in the place of known longitude than in that of unknown longitude, one can easily judge that the longitude of the unknown place is greater by one hour, which is worth 15 degrees, than that of the place known to us. And similarly, one must understand the other differences in time, according to the value of the degrees, always taking 15 degrees for one hour, and four minutes for each degree.

[Example: Tubingen Longitude from Lunar Eclipse]
FOR EXAMPLE, I find in Ptolemy that the longitude of the city of Paris is 25 degrees 30 minutes, and that a lunar eclipse should begin in the said place at three hours after midnight: at this point, I want to know how much longitude Tubingen, a renowned city, has. To do this, I observe in the said place the time that the said eclipse occurs, and I find its beginning, according to my knowledge, 24 minutes after midnight, which is 14 minutes, or 6 degrees, later than in Paris, which I add to the longitude of Paris, because the beginning of the eclipse occurred earlier there: and by this means, I know that Tubingen has twenty-nine degrees 30 minutes of longitude.

[Multiple Observations for Longitude]
Similarly, if one did not know the longitude of any places and wished to observe it in two, three, or as many places as seemed good: it is required for each of the said places to have astrologers, who in those places will truly observe the time when these eclipses begin, then these assembled will come to confer the said time and according to the difference they will have found, one will know the longitude of the places where such observations are made, always taking (as has been said) for each hour fifteen degrees. And for four minutes one degree, if one wishes to reduce the longitude into degrees.

[True Geographic Description]
Upon this observation depends all true geographic description: for to describe a place truly, it is only required to know its latitude and longitude, which longitude is more difficult to observe, and is not easily found every day like latitude.

[Finding Longitude Difference with a Watch]
OTHERWISE, To find the difference in longitude between two cities. We can know this with a small, well-regulated half-watch, by setting the hand to a certain hour, rectified with the Astrolabe when you leave one place to go to another, always paying attention to your watch to keep it accurately: and when you arrive at the intended place, then observe the hour with the Astrolabe, and see if it agrees with that of your watch or not, diligently noting the difference: for if there was none, you would still be under the same meridian; but if it is greater or lesser, you will divide the difference of hours by degrees and minutes, as we have said above; and thus you will know the difference of longitudes between two cities.

[Example: Paris to Lyon Longitude]
EXAMPLE, Departing from Paris to go to Lyon, I rectify my watch with the Astrolabe: and when I arrive at the said city of Lyon, I see that the hand of this watch precisely touches eight o'clock in the morning: and immediately with the Astrolabe I observe the hour, and find eight hours minus three degrees, which are worth 12 minutes: then I judge there to be a difference between the two cities of three degrees, such that if Paris has 25 degrees of longitude, the city of Lyon will have 16. And thus you can do for all other places.

[Note on Proposition 31]
This proposition would merit another place than this treatise, inasmuch as it cannot be put into practice on the Astrolabe, except insofar as it speaks of finding the hour when some eclipse begins, and besides, the subject is a little too long a discourse to speak of it here very pertinently.

[Definition of Longitude]
The longitude of a place is the quantity of meridians comprised between the first meridian and that which passes through the Zenith of the said proposed place, and therefore the difference in longitude of two different places is the difference of their meridians to be counted from the first. Or else we say that the longitude of some place is the arc of the equator comprised between the first meridian and that of the said place; and therefore the difference in longitude of two different places (which Jacquinot simply calls the longitude of one place to another) is the difference of their meridians, or the arc of the said equator comprised between their meridians, or the difference of the arcs of the said equator that each of their meridians encloses with the first. But it must be noted here what David Robert showed not to have understood, that both the longitude of some place and the difference in longitude of two different places can and should be taken as well on the parallels of the said proposed places, or others, as on the equinoctial: inasmuch as two meridians cutting and comprising an arc of the equator, cut and comprise similar ones on all the parallels which are also the measure of the said longitudes or differences as the said arc of the equator, even though their degrees are not each worth 60 miles, like those of the equator (according to Ptolemy). What David Robert believed to be necessary in the measurement of longitudes as well as latitudes: it is indeed true that for convenience in the practice of instruments, in which of all the parallels only the equinoctial is found divided into the ordinary degrees, one uses its division to estimate those of the other parallels.

[Scope of Jacquinot's Observation]
What Jacquinot says here should not extend further than to know only the difference in longitude of two or more places.

[Determining Longitude Difference by Eclipse]
If not simply their longitudes. Now, for the difference in longitudes, it is not necessary to consult Astrologers, it being a sufficiently easy and feasible thing, even for those least advanced in these sciences, by means of an automatic clock. Having recognized in each of the said places, by the movement of the Sun for some preceding days, and observed by sight alone the beginning of a Lunar eclipse in each place, to determine the hour: this being observed in several places, the difference in time and hours that the same eclipse began in each of them, being reduced to degrees of longitude (taking 15 degrees for each hour, and for 4 minutes of an hour, 1 degree) will give the true difference in longitude of the meridians of each of the said places; but to know the longitude of each place, as this author says, and to know by how many meridians or degrees of the equator it is distant from the prime meridian, the observation of the Astrologer will not advance it at all, unless it is co-existent with the said prime meridian, and of the hour that the said eclipse must begin under it: but Jacquinot! Hoc opus, hic labor.

[Finding Time in Another Place]
It will perhaps not be found out of place and useless to add here this proposition, as a converse of that part of the preceding, namely: Being the known hour in some place, to know what hour it is elsewhere. As in the preceding proposition, by means of the difference in hours, one can come to the knowledge of the differences in longitude; so also by means of known longitude, one can judge the difference in hours. If then one proposes some place whose longitude is known, comparing it to that of the place of observation, their difference will be taken, which, reduced to hours and parts or minutes of an hour, and added to the hour of the place of observation (if the proposed place is more oriental and at a greater longitude), or subtracted if it is more occidental and with less longitude, in one or the other way, the hour of the said proposed place will be given. EXAMPLE. Let it be proposed to know what time it is in Rome when it is noon in Paris: inasmuch as Rome has 36 degrees 10 minutes of longitude; and Paris 15 degrees 0 minutes. Their difference is 21 degrees 10 minutes, reduced to parts of hours, is 1 hour 24 minutes, or 40 minutes of hours, which added to the hour of Paris, inasmuch as Rome is more oriental, makes more than 1 hour or nearly 1 hour after noon for Rome, when it is noon in Paris.

[Distance Between Two Cities]
XXXII. PROPOSITION. To know the distance on earth between two cities, or regions. After having known the longitude and latitude of two cities, if you wish to know how many miles or leagues are between them, you must understand that there are three ways to find the distances: Because some places have only distance in latitude, some only in longitude, others in longitude and latitude together. The distance then between two places that have the same longitude, and differ only in latitude, is easier to find than the others: For (according to Ptolemy and others) since to each degree of latitude always correspond 60 Italian miles, after having the difference in latitude of two places, it is only necessary for each degree to take 60 miles, or 30 French leagues, and for each minute one mile, thus you will have the distance of the said places. As for places having the same latitude, differing only in longitude, it is necessary to reduce the degrees of difference of their longitude into degrees of the equinoctial by the following table. And then after this reduction, to do as we have said for degrees of latitude. Canon for understanding the table that follows. The degrees of longitude in this table are reduced to degrees of latitude, supposing that the said latitude does not exceed 58 degrees, and is not less than 35, which include the latitude of the principal places of all Europe. Therefore, to convert the difference of longitude into degrees of latitude, one must enter at the right of the number of latitude of these places, which will be found written below the word (degrees) of the table; and opposite this latitude, take the minutes that correspond to each degree, and by the number of these, multiply the difference of the longitude, thus they will be converted into degrees of the equinoctial, or other great circles, which are similar to degrees of latitude. EXAMPLE. Paris and Tübingen having the same latitude, differ in longitude by six degrees. Now, wishing to reduce this difference into degrees of latitude, or great circles, because the latitude of the said cities is 48 degrees, I enter the table with 48 degrees in number; to the right of which I find 40 minutes, which is the value of one of the degrees of the said longitude: Therefore, by multiplying the said 6 degrees by 40 minutes, it results in 240, which is worth 4 degrees, into which the 6 degrees of longitude are reduced, for each of which I take 60 Italian miles, as we have said for degrees of latitude, and it results in 240 Italian miles, which are worth about six score French leagues. Degrees. Minutes. Degrees. Minutes. 35 59 36 58 37 57 38 56 39 55 40 54 41 53 42 52 43 51 44 50 45 49 46 48 47 47 48 46 49 45 50 44 51 43 52 42 53 41 54 40 55 39 56 38 57 37 58 36

[Distance with Both Longitude and Latitude Differences]
The third way to find the distance between two places, when they have diversity in both longitude and latitude, is that one must take the difference of one and the other, and reduce that of longitude into degrees of latitude by the preceding table. After having multiplied the said difference of longitude in square: similarly that of latitude: and put the said numbers together, then from these find the square root according to the rules of Arithmetic. Which root will show us the degrees of distance of the said places. For each of which it is appropriate to take 60 Italian miles, or 30 French leagues, as has been said. This proposition is still of a very high style for a treatise on the use of the common Astrolabe. Also, Jacquinot has passed over it very modestly, and has only said three words about it as in passing, commendable nonetheless in that he did not wish to engage further in a subject that he testified, by the little he said, that he did not understand. Or on the contrary, the authors of the second impression, as much and more ignorant than Jacquinot in this matter, have filled this proposition with long and tedious discourses with a multitude of examples which are proof of nothing other than their ignorance, whatever excuse they might have taken to conform to the doctrine of Apian, Stöffler, de Mesmes, and others, from whom they took all that they amplified their discourse with, for either they should have been silent altogether, or said little like Jacquinot, or else they should have spoken with more edification, and shown in what the aforementioned Apian, Stöffler, de Mesmes, Jacquinot and others had erred. And it seems to us that this was something one should have expected from Robert's third impression; but far from it, for it still included all the impertinences of the second impression, on which, examining several examples where he found something to criticize, he took occasion to often reprimand Jacquinot for what he had never thought. And we do not doubt, after having noticed this lack in others, that one should, it seems, expect something better from us on this subject. However, it was not our intention to choose this place to speak of it at length as the matter deserves; it is a little too elevated to fall into ordinary and easy practice on common Astrolabes. But inasmuch as the practice is very proper and easy on universal planispheres, we will give the method for it by examining hereafter Jacquinot's text, and David Robert's examples.

[Terrestrial Distances and French Leagues]
It is indeed true that Ptolemy estimated one degree on Earth to be 60 Italian miles, but the experience of many has since testified that the number of 50 agrees better. For our French leagues, we have three kinds: large, medium, and small. Of the large leagues, 20 correspond to one degree on Earth; of the medium, 25; and of the small, 50. Each of the said large leagues is equal to 5 Italian miles; each of the medium, 2 ½; and each small, 2. Just as each German mile equals 4 Italian miles, so that to one degree on Earth correspond quite precisely 60 Italian miles, 15 German miles, and 20 large French leagues, such as those of Provence and Gascony, or 30 small ones, as here in the Île-de-France and its surroundings. And according to this estimation, the first terrestrial distance between two places differing only in latitude is easy to determine, as between Paris and Narbonne, cities situated almost under the same meridian. If from the latitude of Paris, 48 degrees 45 minutes, we subtract that of Narbonne, 43 degrees 40 minutes, there will remain 7 degrees 5 minutes of difference, which multiplied by 20 French leagues will give 141 leagues, or 423 Italian miles of distance in a straight line. It is in this second kind of terrestrial distances that Jacquinot began to follow the error of Apian, Stœffler, and many others, in which he has also been followed by those who have augmented and reprinted his treatise. We therefore say that the distance between two cities situated under the same parallel is not the arc of the said parallel comprised between the two meridians of the said two cities, as Jacquinot and David Robert, with an infinity of others, have imagined, but rather the arc of a great circle comprised between the said two cities, which arc determines the shortest and straightest path on the globe of the Earth, or the shortest distance from one of the said cities to the other. So that it is one thing to give the ratio of a parallel or of its degrees to the equinoctial, or to its divisions; it is another thing to give the arc of the said equinoctial, or of another great circle that can be comprised between the said cities situated under the said parallel. This being well understood here, it will be easy to recognize the error in the examples of David Robert and others who have here augmented Jacquinot's brief discourse with several impertinences. As when, to show that the measurement of differences in latitude cannot serve for differences in longitude outside the equinoctial, they tell us this reason: inasmuch as the terrestrial form, narrowing towards the poles, cannot be measured equally, except at the equator, or 18 degrees higher or lower. As if the terrestrial form were spheroidal and not spherical, and each meridian an ellipse and not a circle. It is indeed true that the space comprised between two meridians continually narrows from the equinoctial to the poles, even though the said meridians comprise the same quantity of degrees of each parallel as of the equinoctial, inasmuch as each such degree is as much smaller and different from each degree of the equinoctial as its parallel, of which it is a part, is smaller and different from the equinoctial. But this does not imply anything about the terrestrial form towards the poles.

[Correcting Terrestrial Distance Measurement]
The only remedy, therefore, that they have brought us to determine the just distance between two cities situated under the same parallel is none other than to reduce the degrees of the said parallel comprised between the two cities to equinoctial degrees, and to multiply the product by the quantity of miles or leagues corresponding to each equinoctial degree. In this, they have indeed given us the distance of the said cities in miles or leagues, taking the path along the said common parallel, but not their shortest distance, the path of which must be taken along an arc of a great circle, which would be represented by a string stretched and taut from one city to the other. And whoever wishes to recognize the difference between their measurement and the true one can do so by means of two circles, one representing the equinoctial, and the other the parallel under which two cities would be situated. For taking the same straight line for that which can and must be imagined to be drawn directly from one city to the other, and subtending it to the said two circles, one will see that it will comprise a much larger arc of the small circle than of the great one. Now, the arc of the distance must be equal to the arc of the greatest circle. Also, the measurements of Jacquinot, Stœffler, de Mermes, Robert, and others are greater than the true ones; and therefore they are not just, nor are their tables useful for this subject, except simply for knowing the difference in miles or leagues of each of the parallels to the equinoctial and of their degrees to its degrees.

[Finding Distance on the Universal Planisphere]
On the Universal Planisphere. Given two cities under the same parallel and under two different meridians, to find their distance. If the two cities are under the equinoctial, the difference of their meridians, multiplied by leagues or miles, will give their just distance. If the said cities are distant from the equinoctial, let the difference of their longitude be taken. Then, placing the rule or movable horizon on the equinoctial line or straight parallel, let the parallel of the proposed cities be counted between the said parallels from the equinoctial. And supposing one of the said cities, which has less longitude, to be under the outer meridian, let their difference in longitude be counted from it along the said parallel. And at the end of the numeration, let the point of the movable brachiolum be moved, or a triangle be formed with the two points marked on the said rule, the vertex of which falls precisely on the said end of the numeration. Then let the said rule be turned so that it represents the horizon of one or the other of the said cities, that is to say, that it represents their polar elevation. Then the said movable point, or the vertex of the same triangle, will show between the parallels, counting from the pole, the quantity of equinoctial degrees, that is to say, the arc of the great circle comprised between the said two cities, which, multiplied as said, either by miles or by leagues, will give you the shortest and just terrestrial distance between the said cities.

[Example: Paris and Tübingen Distance]
EXAMPLE. We will use the example where David Robert found fault. Let Paris and Tübingen be proposed, in latitude 48 degrees 40 minutes, but Paris under 15 degrees 5 minutes, and Tübingen under 50 degrees 5 minutes of longitude, the difference of which is 35 degrees. Having therefore placed the movable horizon on the equinoctial and the movable point of the brachiolum, or the vertex of a triangle, on the intersection of the seventh meridian, counting from the extremity of the rule, with the parallel of 48 degrees 40 minutes, counting from the equinoctial; transferring the rule to the common latitude or polar elevation of 48 degrees 40 minutes, counting from the pole, the said point or vertex of the triangle will be found stopped on the 5th parallel, counting from the same pole. Therefore, you will say that the arc of the great circle comprised between the said cities is 35 degrees, which multiplied by 20 French leagues will give 700 leagues of shortest and just terrestrial distance, or 2100 Italian miles. This number of leagues was rather guessed by Robert than found by a certain way with the aid of his table; for the aforesaid difference of 35 degrees, by his method, is only to be multiplied by 4 ¼ according to his said table, which will produce only 148 ¾ leagues for the distance of the path on the common parallel, and nevertheless he concludes 150, which we have found for the just distance on the great circle passing through both cities.

[Terrestrial Distance Calculation Challenges]
This third type of terrestrial distance in a straight line, as well as the preceding second, should be considered diversely, namely: the two proposed cities being both situated towards the same pole, or towards different poles; or both under the same or different meridians and hemispheres; and again, situated one from the other towards different poles, and under different meridians and hemispheres. But it would be too long and tedious to pursue here the necessary practice in all these different situations to know the distances. We will content ourselves with showing that just as this subject surpasses the practice of common astrolabes, so too it seems to have been little understood by the authors of the second and third impressions, who have greatly augmented and amplified this treatise with examples, as much as by Jacquinot himself. This is so that those curious about such and similar propositions may instruct themselves elsewhere than in their treatise on the practice of astrolabes, and above all, that they do not follow their method, which depends in no way on the astrolabe, but is purely arithmetic, though poorly ordered. And in fact, their method of practice, by extracting square roots, although drawn by them from Apian in Cosmographia, Münster, Stöffler, and others, can only give the required result approximately, more or less, whatever compensation one might make between the two latitudes. This is done by adding half of their differences to the lesser latitude to obtain an average latitude, which, with the difference of the longitudes, forms a rectangle. The extracted square root of its diagonal is then supposed to be the arc of the great circle comprised between the two proposed places. For if this distance were to be measured on a flat surface, their procedure would be founded on reason. But it is quite different on the convex surface of the terrestrial globe, which submits only to the laws of spherical triangles and the planisphere. For, in a word, all this calculation depends on the solution of an oblique spherical triangle with two known sides and the angle they comprise. The said two known sides are the two complements of the known latitudes, and the known angle is the difference of their known longitudes. By means of these, one seeks the side opposite the known angle, which side is the arc of the great circle comprised between the two proposed places. For this prompt and easy solution, the universal planisphere is greatly useful, as it is generally for all other triangles, which we will show in the practice of the examples added in the second and third impressions.

[Finding Distance on the General Planisphere]
On the General Planisphere. Given two places towards the same pole in the same hemisphere, but under different parallels and meridians, to find their distance. Let the Mountains of the Moon, source of the Nile, be proposed, having 11 degrees of south latitude and 57 degrees of longitude; and the Great Promontory of Aspre in Ethiopia, also in south latitude, of 1 degree and 7 degrees of longitude. Both are thus situated towards the same pole and in the same hemisphere. Their distance is sought. Let the rule or movable horizon be drawn and aligned on the equinoctial, and the movable point of the brachiolum applied. Or rather, let a triangle be formed whose apex falls on the intersection of the parallel of the lesser latitude (to be counted from the equinoctial towards one or the other of the poles, which will be taken for the Antarctic pole) with the meridian of the difference of longitudes (to be counted from the greatest and outermost to the extremity of the rule). Then, the rule being transferred to the parallel of the greater latitude (12 degrees, counting from the pole, that is to say, it represents the horizon of the place which has the said 11 degrees of latitude or elevation of the pole), the point of the said brachiolum, or the apex of the same triangle, being found fixed on the 16th parallel, and 7 degrees counting from the same pole, will show you the number of degrees comprised between the two proposed places, which is 16 degrees and 15 minutes. These, multiplied by 50, will give you 487 and a half French leagues, a more accurate and shorter measured distance, and not 494 or 7, as others have found. The same will be practiced for the following example, particularly for that of the distance from Paris to Constantinople. For the rule placed on the equinoctial, and the point of the Brachiolum on the intersection of the lesser latitude of Constantinople (45 degrees, counting from the equinoctial) with the term of the difference of longitudes (that is to say, with the 21st meridian, counting from the extremity of the rule). This being transferred to the latitude of Paris (48 degrees 45 minutes, counting from the pole), the movable point will be found fixed on the 11th parallel, counting from the same pole. And by so many degrees will be the arc of the great circle comprised between Paris and Constantinople. This arc, multiplied in French leagues, will give 690 leagues of distance and the shortest path on the globe of the earth. To avoid being further tedious by enumerating an infinity of other different examples that could be proposed and solved by the planisphere, we refer those who wish to acquire a more particular and perfect knowledge of this to the works of those who have treated it thoroughly, such as Nonius in Chapter 10 of the 2nd book of his Observations, Magini in Problems 15, 16, and 17 of the 1st book of his Primum Mobile, Pitiscus in his Geographical Problems, and particularly to the treatise on it by Petrius Cunerius at the end of his Trigonometry.

[Understanding Winds and Their Origin]
XXXIII. PROPOSITION. To have knowledge of the winds, and from what quarter they proceed. Since winds sensibly change the air and dispose bodies in this lower region, sometimes causing heat, cold, rain, or fair weather, it will be appropriate to know what wind is and whence it proceeds. Wind is an exhalation drawn from the earth by the virtue of the Sun and the stars, hot and dry at its first birth, which (after having been repelled by the cold, being in the second region of the air) moves obliquely around the earth and comes from diverse parts of the horizon. For this reason, winds have diverse names according to the parts of the world from which they issue and blow. To find, therefore, at a certain time what wind reigns and from what part of the horizon it proceeds, one must dispose the astrolabe with its back upwards towards the four cardinal points of the world (by the 25th proposition) in a place where the wind can come naturally, without any reverberation or impediment from a wall or other thing. And erect a movable banner at the center of the back, which, agitated by the wind, will turn so that the hinge or weathercock of this banner will show you the wind that at that moment blows and reigns around the back of the astrolabe, where we have described the four cardinal winds, with their collaterals: namely, on the line of the true East: Subsolanus, and its two collaterals Eurus and Vulturnus. And opposite, towards the Western part, Favonius or Zephyrus, and its two collaterals, Aphricus and Caurus. Similarly, we have described in the Southern part, Auster or Notus, wind of the sea; and beside it, its two neighbors Euroauster and Austroaphricus. Consequently, in the North is described the wind named Septentrio or Apardias, with its circumjacent winds, Circius and Boreas. As appears by the figure below.

[Nature and Effects of Winds]
And it must be understood that among these winds, some are salutary, others pernicious and unhealthy, according to the place and region from which they proceed. For Subsolanus, the wind from the true East, is hot, dry, pure, and subtle: it engenders clouds, makes trees flourish, and gives health to bodies; its collaterals are of the same nature, except that Vulturnus, the wind from the summer East, dries everything. And the winds opposite in the Western part are cold and humid, causing diseases, rains, and thunderstorms. After the wind that comes from the South, with its two collaterals, they are hot and humid, engendering many diseases and heavy rains.

[North Winds: Cold, Dry, and Beneficial]
Finally, the North winds, with their circumvolutions, are cold and dry, dispelling rain, bringing health to bodies, but harmful to the flowers of trees and the fruits of the earth.

[Ascensions of Signs and Arcs of the Zodiac]
It must be noted that the ascension of a sign, or another arc of the zodiac, is the arc of the equinoctial rising with it, or the space of time during which that arc rises above the horizon. Also, it should be understood that ascensions are of two kinds: namely, right and oblique. Right ascensions are those considered on the horizon of the right sphere, and oblique ascensions on the oblique horizon. And in one and the other, a sign is said to rise directly when more than 30 degrees of the equinoctial rise with it, or when it takes more than two hours to rise above the horizon; and obliquely when less than 30 degrees rise with it, or when it does not take two full hours to rise above the said horizon. Furthermore, it is to be considered that commonly these ascensions begin at the first point of Aries, except when one wishes to find the particular ascensions of a sign or degree, or of other arcs of the ecliptic. What Jacquinot says, that in both the right and oblique horizon a sign is said to rise directly or obliquely, should not be understood in such a way that in the right sphere one imagines the Sun or another star (being in whatever sign of the entire Zodiac) can rise or descend obliquely on the horizon; but rather that in comparison of the Zodiac with the equinoctial in the right sphere, as the parts of the said Zodiac are diversely inclined to the horizon, so also there are some which approach more the rectitude of the equinoctial than others. These, on this occasion, are said by Jacquinot to have a right ascension, and the others an oblique ascension. And inasmuch as the equinoctial always rises equally and uniformly, marking off by equal spaces of 15 degrees equal periods of time from hour to hour, that of the signs of the Zodiac, or a portion and arc of the said sign which comprises in the space of its rising more or less space of the equinoctial, is said to rise more directly or more obliquely. As in the said right sphere, the two signs Leo and Scorpio and their opposites, and Aquarius and Taurus, each comprise more than 30 equinoctial degrees, and therefore are said to rise directly and tardily. Those of Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn each comprise less than 30, and therefore are said to rise more obliquely and promptly. This also being considered in every other oblique horizon in the same comparison of the equinoctial rising, it can be said that there are signs or portions which rise more directly than others.

[Finding Ascensions in the Right Sphere]
You must place the end of any sign, or other arc of the ecliptic, on the right horizon in the East; and the rule, placed and situated at the beginning of Aries, will show you their right ascensions on the circle of hours, from the point touched by the rule to the right horizon. EXAMPLE: Desiring to know the ascension of the last degree of Taurus, I place its end on the right horizon in the East; and by directing the rule to the beginning of Aries, I see between the point touched by the rule and the extremity of the right horizon that there are 57 degrees for its right ascension. But if one wishes to know the particular ascension of the said sign of Taurus, one must only move the rule and transfer it to the beginning of the said sign; and from the mark it touches on the limb, up to the right horizon, there will be its particular ascension. As by the preceding example, leaving the end of Taurus on the right horizon, and the rule placed at the beginning of the said sign, I find on the limb its particular ascension to be twenty-nine degrees 54 minutes. And note that in the right sphere, 4 signs, namely Gemini, Cancer, and their opposites, rise and set directly, and the other 8 obliquely. Of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, the four closest to the equinoxes, namely Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, rise promptly and obliquely, each with 17 degrees 54 minutes of the equinoctial; the four furthest and closest to the solstices, namely Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, rise tardily and directly, each with more than 30 degrees, namely 31 degrees 11 minutes of the equinoctial; but the four middle ones, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, although absolutely taken and entirely, they should be said to rise obliquely, as each rising with less than 30 degrees, namely with 19 degrees 54 minutes of the equinoctial; nevertheless, by reason of their medieties considered separately, they can be said to rise sometimes obliquely, sometimes directly, for their half towards the equinoxes rises with less than 15 degrees, as 14 degrees 37 minutes of the equinoctial, but the other towards the solstices rises with more than 15 degrees, namely with 15 degrees 17 minutes, all in the right sphere; which anyone can more particularly recognize by the table of right ascensions, by continuous subtraction of the ascension of each sign from that of its next following, thus the differences between the signs and their parts or degrees will be the particular ascensions required.

[Another Method: Using the Universal Planisphere]
On our universal planisphere, this proposition is easy to practice, provided that one represents to oneself another hemisphere opposite to the one presented by the said plate, in such a way that both the ecliptic line and the equinoctial line are considered two great circles, as they are the common sections with the exterior meridian or the plane of the said plate, and thus of the right line which represents the circle of 6 hours, or the circle of the colure of the equinoxes: at the intersection of which, with the two aforementioned, establishing the beginning of the numeration of the signs and degrees of the Zodiac and of the equinoctial degrees, coming to terminate a quarter of 90 degrees at the meridian towards the right hand, and from there, towards the left hand, again another quarter of 90 at the point of the equinoxes, and the third at the same meridian in its opposite part towards the left hand to return and finish the entire circuit of 360 degrees at the same equinoctial point. Making this distinction, that the said ecliptic line, or the circle it represents, is divided into 30 by 30 degrees by signs, and the said equinoctial line, or the circle it represents, its numeration continues from the first degree through 90, 180, 270, up to 360 and the last. These things presupposed and understood, if you desire to know the right ascension of any sign of the Zodiac or portion thereof, look under which meridian is its beginning and under which other its end: for the quantities will be such meridians counting from the point of the equinoxes, such will be the right ascensions of the beginning and end of such a sign, and thus of the beginning and end of any portion thereof. EXAMPLE: For example, of the first degree of Taurus, you will see it under the 27th meridian and 54 minutes counting from the equinoctial point; and therefore you will say that such is its right ascension 27 degrees 54 minutes, and for the last degree of the same sign, seeing it under the 57th meridian with 48 minutes, you will say that such is also its right ascension. Now let the 15th degree of Scorpio be sought in the ecliptic; inasmuch as it is found under the 42nd meridian with 30 minutes, counting from the said equinoctial point taken for Aries in the opposite hemisphere: if you add the two preceding quarters with the said 42 minutes, you will have 222 degrees 30 minutes of the equinoctial for the right ascension of the 15th degree of Scorpio.

[Finding the Ascension of Stars]
To find the ascension of the stars.

[Right Ascension of Stars]
To know the right ascension of the stars that are described on the Astrolabe, place their point on the right horizon, and the rule at the beginning of Aries. Then count from the right horizon the degrees of the limb up to the point where the rule lies, and you will have the said ascension.

[Example: Spica Virginis Right Ascension]
EXAMPLE. If I wish to know the right ascension of the star Spica Virginis, I place its point on the right horizon in the Eastern part, and by aligning the rule with the beginning of Aries, I find its right ascension to be 194 degrees, between the point touched by the rule and the right horizon.

[Alternative Method for Right Ascension]
ALTERNATIVELY. I would prefer to practice these last two propositions in this manner. Let the beginning of Aries be placed and fixed on the spider (from which all right ascensions and longitudes are counted and begin) on the right horizon or the equinoctial line on the western side, such that the rule applied to it precisely coincides with the beginning of the limb's division. In this case, the rule, transferred to each degree of the Zodiac or point of each star whose right ascension one wishes to know, will show on the said limb, by the quantity of degrees and minutes counted from the said right horizon up to the said rule, the true right ascension of the said degree or star. And it is to be noted that this method is all the more prompt and easy as it is entirely simple and natural, consisting only of a single circumduction of the rule successively over all the degrees of the Zodiac, or over all the stars marked on the spider, which remains immobile and invariable, and in the same constitution as the Zodiac and the stars are in the Sky. Also, in most Astrolabes, particularly our smallest one, the limb on the mother's side is found divided into its 360 degrees by a continuous numbering, starting from the right horizon on the Western side, so that by applying and fixing the beginning of Aries there, the rule, circumducted according to the natural sequence of the signs, will easily show all the right ascensions.

[Right Ascension on the Planisphere]
On the general planisphere. This proposition differs in no way from the practice of the preceding one, except that instead of the degree of the ecliptic, one must take the point marked for the star whose right ascension we wish to know (that is, under which and what meridian it is marked, counting from the first that passes through the point of Aries). But there is this precaution: one must carefully distinguish the hemispheres and not mistake one for the other, that is, that of Aries for its opposite of Libra, nor vice versa. To avoid this, we would find it appropriate to mark and distinguish the stars of the second hemisphere by two small circles, in order to know more easily and promptly in which quarter of the sphere each will be, and thereby to know its true right ascension, counting from the point and beginning of Aries. EXAMPLE. For example, the star Arcturus, marked with two small circles, and passing through the hemisphere of the East, is found under a meridian distant from the point of Aries by 19 degrees and 41 minutes. Therefore, adding the two preceding quarters, you will say that it is distant from Aries by 289 degrees and 41 minutes, and that this is its right ascension.

[Example: Hircus Right Ascension]
Conversely, the star called Hircus, marked with a single small circle, is in the first hemisphere, and being found under a meridian distant from the point of Aries by 21 degrees and 16 minutes, you will say that this is its right ascension.

[Oblique Ascension of Signs]
XXXVII. PROPOSITION. To know the ascension of the signs in the oblique sphere. Place the beginning of a sign, or another arc, on the oblique horizon of your table, with the rule, marking on the limb the point it touches. Then turn the zodiac until the end of the sign, or arc, comes directly onto the oblique horizon, leaving the rule on its beginning. This done, you must count the degrees on the limb from the first mark touched by the rule to the second, and thus you will have this oblique ascension. EXAMPLE. I wish to know how long the sign of Taurus takes to rise at an elevation of 48 degrees. To do this, I place its beginning on the oblique horizon of this table, with the rule, and note the corresponding point on the limb. Then I turn the zodiac with the rule until its last degree falls on the said horizon. Thus, the space between the two marks shows me that its particular ascension is about 19 degrees. And it must be understood that in the oblique sphere, six signs, namely from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Sagittarius, rise directly on our horizon and set obliquely, but the other six, from the first of Capricorn to the end of Gemini, rise obliquely and set directly.

[Simplified Oblique Ascension Method]
* One should not take such trouble as to want to move the spider of the Astrolabe without changing the position of the rule, for just as it does not ordinarily happen in Astrolabes that the movement of the spider causes the rule to move by the same arm, so too is this not absolutely necessary in the practice of this proposition. It suffices only, after having marked on the limb the passage of the rule fixed on the first degree, or beginning of some sign, or arc, and portion thereof constituted on the oriental oblique horizon, to freely turn the spider until the last degree or end of the said sign or arc is precisely situated on the said oblique horizon. And this done, to again transfer the said rule to the said beginning or first degree of the said sign, and to mark on the limb the point on which it passes, for the quantity of degrees and minutes comprised between the said two marks will be the required oblique ascension.

[Another Oblique Ascension Method]
ALTERNATIVELY. We will also give here another method for practicing this proposition, as for knowing the oblique ascension, both of some particular sign or arc taken in its entirety, as in the preceding manner, and of each degree or point in each sign and arc of which Jacquinot has not spoken; then, since the oblique ascension of some point or degree in the Zodiac is nothing other than the degree of the equinoctial co-ascending on the proposed oblique horizon; and the oblique ascension of some sign, the space comprised between the two degrees of the equinoctial co-ascending, one with the beginning, and the other with the end of the said sign: all the difficulty lies in finding the said co-ascending degrees. If, therefore, one wishes to know the oblique ascension of some point or degree of the Zodiac, that point or degree will be brought and fixed on the Oriental oblique horizon, marked on the plate appropriate for the proposed place; then the rule being transferred to the beginning and first degree of Aries, the number of degrees comprised on the limb between the right horizon of the same eastern side and the said rule, will be the oblique ascension of the proposed point or degree. That is to say, that the degree of the equinoctial co-ascending with the said proposed degree is as distant from the vernal section as the said rule is on the limb from the right horizon. This being practiced for the two extremities of some line or arc, the difference of the two products, that is to say the difference between the two distances from the said vernal section found for the co-ascending degrees of the equinoctial, or else the space between the said degrees, will be the required oblique ascension of the whole line or arc.

[Oblique Ascension of Taurus]
For example, if the first degree of Taurus is placed and fixed on the oblique Eastern horizon of the plate used for Paris, and the rule is moved and fixed on the first degree of Aries, you will see that from the direct horizon of the same Eastern side up to the said rule, there are 14 degrees 19 minutes of the equinoctial arc comprised on the limb: this is the oblique ascension for Paris of the first degree of Taurus. Similarly for the last degree of the same sign, having placed and fixed it on the said oblique Eastern horizon, and the rule being transferred and fixed on the first degree of Aries, you will see from the direct horizon up to the said rule 31 degrees 59 minutes of the equinoctial arc comprised on the limb, and this is the oblique ascension of the last degree, or end of the said sign of Taurus. Also, the difference between these two oblique ascensions, namely 18 degrees 30 minutes, will be the oblique ascension of the entire sign, that is to say, that with the entire sign and at the same time, it rises solely on the horizon of Paris for 18 degrees 30 minutes of the equinoctial arc.

[Jacquinot's Terms and Oblique Sphere]
We note two things regarding what Jacquinot says here. First, an impropriety in these terms of rising and setting directly or obliquely in an oblique sphere, for no signs or degrees can rise directly on an oblique horizon, but some rise more slowly and with more time than others, so that according to this more or less time, it seems ridiculous to say they rise directly or obliquely, given that time changes nothing of their ascensional obliquity which is natural to them in the oblique sphere; it would be more acceptable if he said more or less directly or obliquely. Also, what he says, that in an oblique sphere 6 signs rise directly and the other 6 obliquely and descend conversely, is not absolutely true in all oblique spheres, for up to an obliquity of 19 degrees the contrary will be found, but above 20 degrees Jacquinot's statement will hold, which everyone can examine by the tables of oblique ascensions by Montroyal and others.

[Universal Planisphere and Oblique Ascension]
This proposition can be easily practiced on the universal planisphere, by means of direct ascensions known with the ascensional differences, for either their difference in one case, or their sum in the other, gives the required oblique ascension, inasmuch as the ascensional difference is nothing other than the difference between the parts of the equinoctial arc, with which a sign or degree rises in the direct sphere, and those with which the same sign or degree rises in the oblique sphere; and in short, it is the difference between the direct ascension of a sign or degree, and its oblique ascension. We will therefore propose first.

[Finding Ascensional Difference on Planisphere]
PROPOSITION. Given a degree in the Zodiac, to find its ascensional difference by the universal planisphere. Let the horizontal rule be placed in such a position that it represents the horizon of the proposed place, and let the point on it of the rising of the said degree be marked, that is to say, where the parallel of declination of the proposed degree cuts it, for the number of meridians comprised between the said point and the direct meridian will be the required ascensional difference. EXAMPLE. Let the 1st degree of Taurus be proposed. The rule being situated on the 48th degree 45 minutes of polar elevation for Paris, the parallel of declination of the first degree of Taurus will be found to cut it at a point distant from the direct meridian by 13 degrees 15 minutes, and such is the ascensional difference of the said degree on the horizon of Paris. SECOND EXAMPLE. The end of Taurus or the beginning of the 1st degree of Gemini in the same situation of the horizontal rule will be found to rise, that is to say, its parallel will cut the said rule at a point distant from the said direct meridian by 24 degrees, or minutes and 49 minutes: and thus will be the ascensional difference of the said last degree of the.

[Finding Oblique Ascension on Planisphere]
PROPOSITION. Given a degree in the Zodiac, to find its oblique ascension by the universal planisphere. Let the direct ascension of the proposed degree be found by the 35th proposition, and its ascensional difference by the last preceding one. If the said degree is of a northern sign, the difference of these two; or if it is of a southern sign, the sum of the two will be its required oblique ascension. EXAMPLE. Let the beginning and end of the sign of Taurus be proposed. The beginning has a direct ascension of 27 degrees 54 minutes, and an ascensional difference of 13 degrees 25 minutes; inasmuch as it is a northern sign, the difference will be its oblique ascension; that is to say, subtracting 13 degrees 25 minutes from 27 degrees 54 minutes, the remainder 14 degrees 29 minutes will be its required oblique ascension. Similarly for the end, whose direct ascension is 57 degrees 48 minutes and ascensional difference 24 degrees 49 minutes, the difference 32 degrees 59 minutes will be its oblique ascension.

[Corollary: Equidistant Degrees and Oblique Ascension]
COROLLARY. Since two degrees in the Zodiac equidistant from the same equinox rise at two points equidistant from the equinoctial sections, and mark on the planisphere two points equally distant from the direct meridian, one necessarily being northern, and the other southern; it will also necessarily happen that the oblique ascension of one will decrease as much from its direct ascension as the other increases. For example, the 1st of Scorpio, having 207 degrees 54 minutes of direct ascension, and the same ascensional difference as the 1st of Taurus, namely 13 degrees 25 minutes, inasmuch as it is southern, it will increase its said direct ascension by the said 13 degrees 25 minutes, by which the 1st of Taurus decreases it: and therefore its oblique ascension will be 221 degrees 19 minutes: Thus, if a degree rises more directly, its opposite will rise more obliquely.

[Descent of Signs in Direct and Oblique Sphere]
XXXVIII. PROPOSITION. On the descent of signs, both in the direct and oblique sphere. For the descent, there is no need to give a rule, because in the direct sphere the ascension and descent of a sign are always the same. And in the oblique sphere, the descent of a sign is found by the ascension of its opposite, to which it is always equal. EXAMPLE. The descent of the sign of Taurus will be 41 degrees, because the ascension of the sign of Scorpio, which is its opposite, is found to have that many degrees: also the descent of Scorpio will be 19 degrees, which is the ascension of Taurus; and so for the others: by dividing these degrees by 15, you will have the hours and minutes in which these signs rise and set. This means during which, or in the space of which, the said signs rise and set.

[Descent on the Universal Planisphere]
On the Universal Planisphere. This proposition receives no difference on our universal planisphere from what was said in the preceding one, whether one uses the same proposed degree for its required oblique descent, or whether for the same subject one takes the opposite degree, to know the oblique descent of the other by the oblique ascension of the one.

[Finding the Four Angles of the Sky]
XXXIX. PROPOSITION. To find the four angles, or centers of the sky, namely the four principal houses. It must be understood that the entire sky is divided in several and diverse ways.

[House Calculation Principles]
Some are for measuring hours and other periods of time, which are reduced to the equinoctial, according to the movement of the first mobile. The others are for the distinction of the proper movements of the stars, which refer to the 12 celestial signs of the ecliptic of the first mobile. And because, in addition to the time and movements mentioned above, one considers the influences of the stars according to both movements and their diverse situation, the ancient philosophers divided the sky into twelve equal parts, which are commonly called the 12 houses. This is done by 12 permanent circles (as we said in the declaration of the parts), of which the 2 principal ones are the oblique horizon and the meridian, which always distinguish the four cardinal parts of the world, namely East, North, West, and South: which are called the first, 4th, 7th, and tenth houses. To find and know their beginning, one must place the degree of the Sun between the Almicantaraths, at the same altitude as you will have found by the back of the Astrolabe, and the degree of the zodiac that falls in the eastern part of the oblique horizon will be the Ascendant angle.

[Horoscope and House Angles]
which we call the horoscope, or first house, of which the opposite degree, which falls on the said horizon in the West, is the western angle, otherwise called the seventh house. Consequently, the degree that is directly on the meridian line will be the angle of the Midheaven, called the 10th house, and its nadir, which touches the midnight line, is the angle of the Earth, called the fourth house.

[House Calculation Example]
EXAMPLE: Wanting to erect a figure for someone born on April 26th, the Sun being in the 7th degree of Taurus, I take the altitude of the Sun on the back of the Astrolabe, which I find to be forty-six degrees after noon. Then, the degree of the Sun being placed and positioned at the same altitude between the Almicantaraths, I find the twenty-second degree of Virgo falling on the oblique horizon in the East, which will be the horoscope of that nativity; and the twenty-second degree of Pisces in the West, which is its opposite. Similarly, on the meridian line, I find the 10th degree of Gemini; and on the midnight line, the 26th degree of Sagittarius, which is its nadir. These we have arranged in this Geometric figure, as is customary in Astronomy.

[Altitude and Time Considerations]
This should be understood in cases where the hour is not known, for otherwise it would not be necessary to take the said altitude; also, the Sun does not always shine, nor at all hours that one would want to practice this proportion, nor even most often in the place where one would want. In which case, the rule placed on the known hour, and the degree of the Sun also known, being moved, one will have what one desires, following Jacquinot's doctrine. Nevertheless, it will always be safest, if the sun is shining, to take the altitude.

[Critique of Jacquinot's Method]
There is something to criticize in what Jacquinot says here, which the authors of the second and third impressions should have rather noted, than to entirely change Jacquinot's example and commit a greater impertinence in theirs. What concerns Jacquinot is of little importance, yet it deserves to be noted. To erect, he says, a figure for someone born on April 26th, one must take the altitude of the Sun, etc. Now, at the instant of birth, the altitude of the Sun is no longer useful; one must otherwise have the hour and moment of the said birth known to erect the said figure, and place the degree of the Sun on the known hour and do the rest of what Jacquinot teaches. It is another thing if, at the instant and moment of the said birth, one wants to practice this proportion and know the hour otherwise unknown; thus, what Jacquinot says serves to erect a celestial figure for the instant of someone's birth or for some other present subject, and not for a person already born, or another past subject. The greater impertinence noted in later impressions is to have added the known hour; for to erect a figure for a person born on June 2nd, 34 hours after noon, the Sun being in the 3rd degree of Cancer, they began by taking the altitude of the Sun on the back of the Astrolabe, which they found, they say, to be 34 degrees, and they place the said degree of the Sun on a similar Almicantarath. A very ridiculous thing, even if it were not impossible, having knowledge of the hour at which a person was born, to nevertheless afterwards take the altitude of the Sun to know the said past hour. Such observations only serve for the knowledge of the present hour and the momentary instant of observation, and not for the past. They therefore teach to seek and know something notorious and already known by other means, by a method that would be useless if it were unknown.

[Corrected House Calculation Example]
We will therefore revert to their example as follows, and as it can be practiced and known on our small Astrolabes. Let the birth in Paris of someone on June 24th, 1611, at 6 hours 45 minutes and 34 seconds after noon, the Sun being precisely in the 3rd degree of Cancer, for which one wishes to erect a figure of the constitution of the Sky. Let the Alidade or rule be placed on the proposed hour, namely 6 hours 45 minutes 34 seconds after noon, and the said degree of the Sun, 3rd of Cancer, be guided and stopped under the said rule, so that it corresponds precisely under the celestial line of the Alidade. Then one will see the 17th degree of Aries fall on the eastern oblique horizon, which will be the horoscope of the said birth. The 17th degree of Libra on the other side falls on the western oblique horizon, on the meridian line, the 15th degree of Capricorn, and at the Nadir or midnight, the 19th degree of Cancer, about 5 minutes of Virgo: and these are the 4 principal houses required for the instant of the said birth, which the following figure represents.

[Altitude for Unknown Time]
It will be another matter if, at the instant of the said birth, one wishes to know the hour by the sun, for it will be necessary to take the altitude, and to erect the said figure, place its degree on a similar Almicantarath, or opposite the hour known by observation.

[General Planisphere Usage]
All these following propositions, up to the end of this treatise, are made to be practiced on the universal planisphere without any other aid; and therefore, we will content ourselves with having only reported those whose construction and manner of practice have been found simple and easy.

[Erecting the Twelve Houses]
XL. PROPOSITION. To know how to erect the twelve houses of the sky at all hours and at all times. There are two principal ways to erect the houses of the sky, one of which is given by the ancients, and the other by modern astrologers, namely by Regiomontanus and Peurbach. And although they differ little among themselves, the modern method has some advantage in convenience, and is that which is commonly used today. Nevertheless, we will teach the practice of both. Some add a third method according to Campanus, which we do not find to have yet been treated in the use of the Astrolabe.

[Regiomontanus House Method]
To erect a figure according to the method of Regiomontanus, which among others is the best and most reasonable, it is necessary to know the hour precisely by the Sun, star, or clock: and to place the small rule, with the degree of the sun, on that hour (as we have demonstrated above) keeping the zodiac firm in place.

[House Division by Angles]
Then you will find the four angles by the preceding doctrine, which will be for the beginning of the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses. For the other eight, you will look at the eight degrees of the ecliptic that fall upon one and the other part of the four great circles described both above and below the horizon, in the tables of regions: namely, for the second house, the degree of the zodiac that is on the next arc of the oblique horizon, extending to the midnight line, and the third in a similar following arc. Consequently, for the fifth and sixth, you will consider the two arcs between the angle of the earth and the West. And after having established these first six without looking at the parts of these arcs, you will be able to find by similar degrees of the opposite signs the other six houses: for the first is opposite to the seventh (as we have already said), the second to the eighth, the third to the ninth, the angle of the earth to the tenth, the fifth to the eleventh, and similarly the sixth to the twelfth.

[Figure for Example]
Figure for example.

[Jacquinot's Astrological Methods]
This proportion, with the three following, concerns judicial Astrology, where Jacquinot, in conformity with previous Astrolabographers, treats methods for erecting celestial figures, distinguishing the twelve houses of the Sky, figuring nativities, finding horoscopes or ascendants, recognizing the diverse aspects, and finally representing all the revolutions of the aforesaid things, of which, besides that they require another place, we will speak here only indifferently, it not being our goal either to lead the reader to it or to dissuade him from it; we will only content ourselves with saying that what Jacquinot notes in these last propositions, which are vulgar, common, and easy, is but a means between two very difficult, rare, and little known things: the first being a great precision and certainty in observations, the other a long and circumspect experience. The first can give us the calculation and the figures, and the latter will assure us a more certain judgment. And we will say furthermore that it is always very pleasing and agreeable to be able at all times to figure and represent, as in a painting, the apparent constitution of the Sky and the arrangement of its phenomena, not only for the present hour, but also for any other time, past or future: as, besides Jacquinot's figure, which is passable for his time, it can be seen in the one we add here.

[Second Method of House Division]
The second method for dividing the houses according to the ancients. You can furthermore (according to the ancients) find the twelve houses of the sky by the doctrine that follows. First, you must know, as above, the four angles, then direct the degree of the ascendant to the arc of the eighth unequal hour, and the degree that falls on the midnight line is the beginning of the second house. Afterwards, bring back the said ascendant to the end of the tenth unequal hour, and the degree you find on the said midnight line is the beginning of the third house. This done, take the degree of the seventh, and direct it to the second unequal hour, then the degree of the sign that falls on the midnight line will be the beginning of the fifth house. Similarly, you will turn the said degree of the seventh to the fourth unequal hour, and the beginning of the sixth house will fall on the said midnight line, so that you will have the first six houses: And by their opposite degrees, without an Astrolabe, you will be able to find the beginnings of the other six, which will be the twelve houses of the sky, according to whose disposition we can judge the events of the world, by placing in them, by ephemerides or other tables, the planets and fixed stars.

[Alternative House Division Method]
You can also by another calculation (according to this second method) find the aforesaid twelve houses, by placing the rule on the degree of the ascendant, and marking the point of the limb that it touches. After this, divide into three equal parts the arc that is from the said point to the meridian line, and the rule, placed at the first division which is on the horizon, will divide and distinguish the beginning of the twelfth house by the degrees of the ecliptic. Also, this rule, moved to the second division, extending to the meridian line, will show the eleventh house. Similarly, the arc that is from the point marked at the ascendant to the midnight line, divided into three equal portions, will teach us the beginning of the other houses: namely the second by the first division marked below the horizon, and the third by the second division, extending to the midnight line, by directing the rule to their beginning as already said, and by the opposite degrees of these, you will know the beginning of the other houses as before.

[Understanding Aspects of Stars and Planets]
The aspect of stars, both fixed and erratic, is nothing other than a certain habit they sometimes have together in the sky, according to which they communicate their lights and influences more sensibly. And although the said aspects can be known without the Astrolabe, nevertheless, because we have spoken of the twelve houses of the sky, concerning astrological judgments, in which aspects are required, it is appropriate to speak briefly of them according to the degrees of the ecliptic, which is the most universal method, for as for other ways of practicing the said aspects, tables are required, such as those of Regiomontanus, or others. It must therefore be understood that, including conjunction among the aspects, there are five types: namely, Conjunction, Opposition, Trine, Square, and Sextile.

[Calculating Aspects with the Astrolabe]
Therefore, if you wish to know the said aspects by the Astrolabe, you must understand that all degrees or stars distant by two signs, which is the sixth part of the whole circle, regard each other with a Sextile aspect, like the first of Aries to the first of Gemini. Furthermore, if you see three signs or ninety degrees between two stars, which is the fourth part of the said circle, it will be a Square aspect, like the first of Aries to the first of Cancer. Moreover, if you find a distance of four signs, which are one hundred twenty degrees, or the third part of the ecliptic, it is a Trine aspect, as would be the first of Aries to the first of Leo. Furthermore, if the said places are distant from each other by six signs, or 180 degrees, which is half of the circle, they will regard each other with an Opposition aspect, like the first of Aries to the beginning of Libra. Finally, when two stars are together in the same sign and degree, this is called a Conjunction. And it is necessary to know that of the said aspects there are three: namely, the Sextile, the Square, and the Trine, which are double, looking to the dexter and to the sinister: The sinister aspect is made according to the order of the twelve signs of the Zodiac: and the dexter, on the contrary, against the order and succession of the said signs.

[Dexter and Sinister Aspects]
EXAMPLE. The Moon being in the first of Aries regards Jupiter in the beginning of Aquarius with a dexter sextile aspect: and on the other side regards Venus being in the first of Gemini with a sinister sextile aspect, and so for the others, of which you have the figure described hereafter. Furthermore, it must be understood that of the said aspects some are good and temperate, and others bad, according to the repugnance or similitude of the places where they are made, or according to the quality of the stars found in the said places. As the Sextile is made of two signs agreeing in one quality, such as Aries and Gemini, similar in heat, which is an aspect of moderate friendship.

[Trine Aspect and Enmity]
And the Trine is made of two signs of the same nature and quality, like Aries to Leo, which are hot and dry, wherefore it is an aspect of perfect friendship and agreement. But aspects of enmity are made in signs repugnant in one or two qualities, thus the Square is an aspect of medium enmity, and the Opposition of complete hatred. This is esteemed malefic, both for the distance from one place to another, and for their contrariety.

[To Know the Horoscope of Revolutions]
To know the horoscope and ascending degree of the revolutions of the world, or of nativities, or other commencements.

[Revolution of the World's Years]
The revolution of the years of the world is when the Sun returns to the first degree and minute of the sign of Aries, which in our time is around the tenth of March, where we have the spring equinox.

[Revolution of Nativities and Beginnings]
The revolution of nativities, or of other things, such as a building, an election, or other commencements: is when the Sun re-enters the same degree and minute as it was at the hour when these things began.

[Calculating Revolutions with the Astrolabe]
Therefore, to know the horoscope of the said revolutions each year by the Astrolabe, you must have a root and a certain time of the commencement of that thing, or of one of the preceding revolutions, and note that time by the hours and minutes on the limb of the Astrolabe for your root. Afterwards, for each subsequent year, you must count from the point of that root on the Astrolabe 87 degrees and 19 minutes, or five hours and about 49 minutes, taking 15 degrees for one hour, and four minutes for one degree. Then set the rule over the end of that number, under which you will bring the degree where the Sun was at the time of the root of that revolution. This done, you will have the horoscope with the other angles, according to which you can find the other 12 houses of the sky, as has been said above, and erect the Astronomical figure to judge the disposition of that revolution.

[Example: World Revolution 1544]
EXAMPLE. Wanting to know the revolution of the world for the year 1544, inasmuch as in the year 1541 the revolution occurred in Paris on March 10th at 10 hours 44 minutes after noon, which I had marked on the limb of the Astrolabe as a root for subsequent years, I find that from the time of that root until the year 1544 there are two years. Therefore, I count on the limb of the Astrolabe from that root twice five hours and 49 minutes, or twice 87 degrees and nineteen minutes, which are one hundred seventy-four degrees and thirty-eight minutes. And I find at the end of these degrees that the revolution falls on ten o'clock in the morning, and about five degrees and a half, which are worth twenty-two minutes, opposite which I set the first of Aries with the rule, and I see the fourth of Cancer fall on the oblique horizon, which will be the horoscope for the said year.

[Revolution of the Year 1544]
Revolution of the year 1544, March 10th at 10 hours 21 minutes before noon, for latitude 48.

[Table for Solar Revolutions]
But because it would be a laborious thing to always count from the root as many times 87 degrees and 49 minutes on the limb of the instrument as there are years passed, we have added here a table, by which we can easily find the said revolutions, by looking at the years from the root up to that of your revolution, by entering with the number of these described below this title, the number of years, on the left side of the table, opposite which on the right hand you will find the number of degrees that you must count on the limb of the Astrolabe from the mark of the root until the end of these degrees: thus you will have the hour when the revolution occurred, and you will erect the 12 houses of the Sky, as has been said.

[Using the Table for Revolutions]
And if it happens that the years since your root are not found in any of the numbers on the left side, you must take the nearest below, and then enter with what is lacking from the total number, and add these degrees found together twice, always rejecting 360 if necessary, and count the remainder from the place of the root, according to the order of the description of the hours.

[Example: Revolution Calculation with Table]
EXAMPLE. Suppose there were 25 years from the root of a nativity until its revolution. I first enter the table with 20, which is the nearest lower number, opposite which I find 306 degrees and 19 minutes. And because there are still 5 years remaining, I go to the number 5 in the said table, where I find 76 degrees and 35 minutes. These numbers joined together result in 382 degrees and 54 minutes: therefore, by rejecting 360, which is the whole circle, there remain 22 degrees and 54 minutes, which must be counted from the place of the root, and there bring the place of the Sun with the rule. Thus you will see the hour when the said revolution begins, and its horoscope, as has been said.

[Jacquinot's Time and Equinox]
This refers to Jacquinot's time, for at this time, according to our small Astrolabes, we have, as has been said in several places, the spring equinox around March 11th.

[Recognizing Celestial Changes]
In this last proposition, Jacquinot proposes to us to recognize, by means of the Astrolabe, the various changes in the Sky and the new encounters of the stars that accompany the returns of the Sun to the same points, places, and degrees of the Zodiac in which it will have been calculated or observed and recognized when something remarkable has presented itself; which we still say is a sufficiently powerful and agreeable thing, provided it is practiced exactly, but which cannot be practiced very justly except with the aid of some ephemerides. It is true, however, that for the Astrolabe one can without sensible error

[Using Tables for Astrolabe]
use some table proper to this subject, like the one our Author has placed here. This table of solar or annual revolutions, placed here by Jacquinot, is found in all Authors who have written on the use of the Astrolabe, even in the Catholicon or universal of Gemma Frisius, but none discovers its origin, and does not give the reason, although the thing is easy to construct. Nevertheless, its utility being great, it should not have been despised and passed over in silence. Now its utility is such that if once the place of the Sun has been examined and recognized for some subject that has presented itself, one can by means of the said table, know and recognize promptly for several past years, and as many others soon to come, the passages and returns of the Sun to the same place, and this quite precisely without the aid of any Ephemerides. Adrian Metius, having come across this subject in his Astronomical institutions, in book 2, chapter 10, where he speaks of celestial figures, although exact everywhere else, fell asleep in this place, for he who reformed all his tables and submitted his calculation to the observations of Tycho Brahe, as more truthful than any preceding ones, instead of this vulgar table of Stoeffler, Jacquinot and others, decided to copy a more vicious one found in the ephemerides of Stadius, without giving any reason for its construction. We therefore say that as the surest and most exact practice on this proposition depends

[Solar Year Calculation]
absolutely from the knowledge of the exact quantity of the Solar year, which can only be obtained by two means: either by observation, or by Ephemerides well and accurately calculated. Likewise, the construction of the aforementioned table must be derived from this, which is nothing other than the excess of the quantity of the Solar year over the quantity of the common Civil year, reduced to hours and minutes, converted into degrees of the Equinoctial, and accumulated upon itself by continuous addition for one year, always rejecting both the entire circle of 360 degrees and the entire day of 24 hours.

[Tycho Brahe's Solar Year Observation]
This excess is recognized by the observation of the Sun's entry into the same point of the Zodiac for two consecutive years. Thus, Tycho Brahe noted that the Sun always entered later into the same point the following year by 5 hours, nearly 49 minutes. Therefore, the Solar year, which is the return of the Sun to the same point after the complete revolution of the entire Zodiac, is found to be 365 days, 5 hours, nearly 49 minutes.

[Solar vs. Civil Year Accumulation]
Now, just as all years follow and are counted by continuous addition and accumulation of 365 days, which is the quantity of the common Civil year, so too are Solar years (what Jacquinot and others call Solar revolutions) counted by continuous additions and accumulations of the 5 hours 49 minutes beyond the said 365 days of the common Civil year.

[Ephemerides and Equinoctial Degrees]
This excess is also recognized by the Ephemerides, and is nothing other than the difference in hours and minutes of the Sun's entry into the same point of the Zodiac. This difference, as in the said Ephemerides, for whatever quantity of years one may propose, is always found to be less than 24 hours. Also, reduced as it is, into degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial, it is always found in the aforesaid table to be less than 360 degrees, due to the rejection of the entire circle when the sum of the added differences exceeds it. And since by experience and observations this difference is found to be almost always equal from one year to another, at least in these times, so too by continuous addition of the same number, either in hours or in Equinoctial degrees, one can construct a table to serve for several hundred years without sensible error.

[Table Reduction to Hours and Minutes]
But we deem it more appropriate to reduce this table to hours and minutes of hours, and for greater ease in the practice of this proposition, even on the Astrolabe, inasmuch as our root being known to us in hours and minutes, the addition or subtraction will be made much more easily from the said differences placed in hours and minutes, than in degrees and minutes, without changing anything of the method of practice prescribed by Jacquinot, except that it will always be more prompt and more appropriate to join together the hours of the root with those of the difference, so that, counting from midday, one turns the rule for as many hours, and stops it at the end of the whole number of hours and minutes. For then the first degree (as for our example above) or other degree of the Zodiac of the Scorpion known as the root, being brought and stopped under the said rule, one will know the horoscope or ascending degree on the oblique Eastern horizon, with the three other principal points: under the meridian, on the West, and under the North or Imum Coeli, which are the four principal angular and cardinal houses of the figure of the said sought revolution; and similarly for the other houses according to the degrees of the Zodiac that will be found stopped under their circles.

[Leap Year Correction for Revolutions]
We will add here this remark, that it is necessary and absolutely essential to make and observe in the practice of this proposition and in the use of the aforesaid table or another, such as the one we will put hereafter calculated in hours and minutes. This is that one must differentiate between leap years and common years: For example, if the proposed year in which one wishes to know the revolution of the Sun is a leap year, the number of years since or before the known root, being marked in the aforesaid tables, will give directly the true number of hours at the end of which the revolution must take place, or has previously taken place in the proposed year; but for the true day, it can only be obtained by decreasing the total sum or remainder (after the addition or subtraction of the hours found in the said tables) by one entire day, or 24 hours.

[New Revolution Table and Usage]
We will therefore conclude this last proposition of Jacquinot's Astrolabe with a new table of Revolutions, by a new exposition and example of its use, and by a new figure, all in conformity with our small Astrolabes.

[Table Construction and Precision]
This table that we propose has been calculated by all in hours and minutes of hours by a continuous addition of the excess of the Solar year over the common Civil year; and although Tycho Brahe constructed particular ones for each of the 12 signs of the Zodiac, nevertheless we have considered that a single one could suffice for all, both because of the small difference between them of only a few minutes, and because this scrupulous precision, for which all the said tables were particularly made, is neither absolutely necessary nor in any way recognizable on the Astrolabe.

[Revolution Table]
Years, H. M. | Years, H. M. 1: 5.48. 2: 11.49. 3: 17.24. 4: 23.12. 5: 0. 6: 10.48. 7: 16.36. 8: 21.24. 9: 4.12. 10: 10.0. 20: 10.1. 30: 6.1. 40: 16.2. 50: 2.2. 60: 12.2. 70: 18.3. 80: 4.4. 90: 14.4. 100: 0.5. 200: 10.10.

[Table Usage for Solar Revolutions]
For the most certain use of both this table and Jacquinot's, it should be noted that for the proposed years, before or after some known root, for which one desires to know the revolution of the Sun, the nearest preceding leap year will always be taken. And by its difference from the root noted in the aforesaid tables, the number of hours and minutes found opposite will be taken. This being subtracted from the root for preceding years, or added to it for subsequent years, and from the remainder or sum, after subtracting one day, one will have the day, hour, and minutes of the Revolution in the said leap year. This being set as a new root, then by the difference of the said first proposed year, one re-enters the said table, and the number found opposite, added to the said new root, will give the time and moment very close to the true Revolution of the proposed year.

[Example: 1614 to 1625 Revolution]
We will take as an example the Figure we added above on the 40th proposition, in which we have as a certain root, the place of the Sun at the 10th degree, 54 minutes, 50 seconds of Cancer, at the time of a certain birth, on the 1st day of June 1614, at 6 hours 45 minutes after midday, and for the horoscope or ascending degree the 28th degree, 55 minutes of Virgo. If then one desires to know the revolution of this birth, that is to say, both the hour of the Sun's return to the same 10th degree, 54 minutes, 50 seconds of Cancer, and the new constitution of the entire Zodiac accompanying the said return in the next year 1625, taking the next lesser leap year 1624, with its difference from the root 1614, namely 10 years, I enter the aforesaid table, and find opposite 10 hours 0 minutes, which added to the root 6 hours 45 minutes gives the 1st of June, 16 hours 45 minutes; from which, having subtracted one day because the year 1614 is a leap year, there remains the 31st day of May, 16 hours 45 minutes for a new root, in the said year 1624, which differs from the proposed year 1625 by only one year, with this difference entering into the table, the number found opposite...

[Revolution Calculation Example]
to know 5 hours 48 minutes, added to the number of the new moon, May 1st, 16 hours 45 minutes, gives May 31st, 21 hours 35 minutes, that is to say, the first day of June at 10 hours 55 minutes in the morning or before noon. The revolution will be from the Sun's entry into the 10th degree, 54 minutes, 50 seconds, from which degree of the Sun, being guided and stopped under the rule placed on the 10 hours, 55 minutes of the morning marked on the limb, one will see on the Eastern horizon the Ascendant degree, or the horoscope, to be the 18th degree, 51 minutes, 56 seconds of Cancer. At the Midheaven, the 20th degree, 00 minutes, 15 seconds of Aries. At the setting, which is the angle of the 7th house, the 18th degree, 51 minutes, 56 seconds of Capricorn; and under the Imum Coeli, the 20th degree, 00 minutes, 15 seconds of Libra, and so for the others as they are found under the other circles, which must then be arranged in a Figure, as has been said before, and as the following clearly shows.

[Figure of Revolution 1619]
Figure of Revolution 1619. Before noon. We have here changed the common practice of the Tuscan tables, because for lack of distinguishing bissextile years from common ones, it will often happen that one will be in doubt after the necessary addition or subtraction of hours and minutes, to which day the compound or residue should be attributed, to be the true day of the revolution: Thus in the example above, having taken 15 hours 48 minutes for 11 years, and these added to the 8 hours 45 minutes of the root, the whole will be June 1st, 11 hours 45 minutes, as Jacquinot and others teach: And yet it must be said the last day of May with 21 hours 53 minutes, that is to say June 1st, at 10 hours 55 minutes before noon.

[End of Astronomical Propositions]
End of Jacquinot's Astronomical Propositions.

[Addition of Gnomonic Propositions]
ADDITION. We have also found it appropriate to add here some Gnomonic propositions, which can be easily practiced on the Astrolabe, and are useful for the speculation and construction of an infinity of various quadrants or sciotheric clocks, both horizontal and vertical, for any sphere position or polar elevation, even on declining or inclined planes.

[PROPOSITION I: Horizontal Hour Arcs]
PROPOSITION I. Given the height of the Pole of any place, to find the horizontal hour arcs. This proposition serves for the description of horizontal quadrants or clocks. Let the rule be drawn and stopped on the inner side or limb of the Astrolabe, on each 15 degrees of the limb, counting from the meridian line on one side or the other, that is to say on the points of 1, 2, 3 hours, etc., or on those of 11, 10, 9 hours, etc., and let it be counted on the oblique horizon of the proposed place (for which we assume that a suitable and particular plate will have been prepared beforehand) how many Azimuths are comprised between the said rule and the said meridian line, for the number of said Azimuths or vertical circles will be the number of horizontal degrees due to the arc of the hour, before or after noon, on which the said rule will be stopped, taking care however, if the rule does not precisely cut the said oblique horizon at a point where one of the said Azimuths terminates (as rarely happens, especially in small and medium Astrolabes where the said Azimuths are only traced by 3s or by 5s) to estimate as accurately as possible in degrees and minutes the space comprised by the rule on the said oblique horizon, beyond the last of the said Azimuths.

[Example: Horizontal Hour Arc for Paris]
EXAMPLE. For example, to find the horizontal hour arc of one hour for Paris. Having drawn and stopped the rule on the point of 1 hour on the limb, one sees on the oblique horizon that from the point where the meridian line cuts it, to the said rule, there are about 11 Azimuths and 13 parts, which give 11 degrees and 13 minutes for the horizontal arc of one hour before or after noon. Thus, the rule placed on 2 hours after noon or 10 in the morning, the horizontal arc of 2 hours will be found to be about 15 degrees 16 minutes. NOTE. To know the number of hours inscribable on a horizontal quadrant or clock for any proposed place, one must place the rule on the point where the oblique horizon of the plate appropriate for the said place terminates with the circle or tropic of Capricorn, which is the largest and outermost circle of the said plate, and see on the limb at what hour the said rule is stopped, for that hour on one side towards the West shows the hour or part of the sunrise on the longest day of the year, and therefore the first inscribable on the said horizontal clock, and on the other side towards the East, the hour of sunset on the same longest day will be known, and therefore the last inscribable on the said clock.

[General Planisphere Method]
On the General Planisphere. Let the rule or movable horizon be drawn and stopped on the center of the given height or polar elevation, so that it represents the horizon of the proposed place; and let the points through which the hour circles pass be marked on it, and this counting from the largest circle or exterior meridian up to the point where the said rule cuts the Tropic of Winter; for the said rule being transferred to the equinoctial or right horizon, will show between the said hour circles, counting from point to point, beginning from the extremity tending towards the center, the required horizontal hour arcs. For example, for Paris, having drawn and stopped the rule on the 48th degree 45 minutes, counting from one or the other of the poles, etc., and having marked on it the points of common section with the said hour circles, the said rule transferred to the right horizon shows between the meridian circle and the first point 11 circles and about 13, that is to say 11 degrees and about 13 minutes for the hour arc of 1 hour after noon, or 11 hours before noon (because two hours equally distant from noon comprise equal and similar hour arcs); between the same meridian and the second point will likewise be found 15 degrees about 16 minutes, by as many circles or meridians comprised by the horizontal arc of 2 hours after noon or 10 hours in the morning, and so for the others.

[Note on Hour Arcs]
NOTE I. It is to be noted that we only need to mark the said points from the exterior circle to the meridian up to the intersection of the rule with the Tropic of Winter, inasmuch as for any proposed place, this space measures the semidiurnal arc of the longest day, and doubled determines the quantity of the said entire longest day. That is to say, taken in one way, it gives the morning hours, and returning gives those of the afternoon, so that one can recognize, by this space, the number of hours inscribable in a horizontal clock for the said proposed place.

[Note on Hour Symmetry]
NOTE II. It is also to be noted that for convenience one can be content with the arcs of the 6 hours comprised from the meridian up to the line which represents the circle of 6 hours, inasmuch as two hours equidistant both from noon and from the circle of 6 hours, always comprise similar and equal horizontal hour arcs, thus the space from 5 hours to 6 will serve for that from 6 to 7, that from 4 to 5 will give that between 7 and 8, and so for the others, without going further than to the Tropic of Cancer or Summer, so as not to include more than the useful and necessary hours.

[PROPOSITION II: Vertical Hour Arcs]
PROPOSITION II. Given the height of the pole of any place, to find the vertical hour arcs. This proposition will serve for the description of vertical quadrants or clocks.

[Measuring Vertical Hourly Arcs]
Let the rule be moved as stated in the preceding proposition, and successively stopped on all the hours of the limb, and note how many Almicantaraths or circles and degrees of altitude will be comprised between the said rule and the Zenith or vertical point of the particular and proper plate for the proposed place, cutting the first and principal vertical circle, namely the Azimuth passing through the said Zenith and terminating at the two vernal sections or points of common section in the East and West of the equinoctial circle with the oblique horizon: for the number of said Almicantaraths comprised between the said rule and the said vertical point or zenith will be the number of degrees due to the vertical hourly arc of the hour, on which the rule will have been stopped.

[Example: Vertical Arc for Paris]
For example, for the vertical arc of a space of 2 hours before or after midday at the elevation of Paris, the rule being placed on 10 hours or 11 hours on the limb, that is to say, on 30 degrees of distance from the arc or from the other side of the line or point of midday, it is found that between the said rule and the vertical point or zenith, there are 2 Almicantaraths and about 3/4, which cut the said vertical circle, and therefore it will be said that the vertical hourly arc of 1 hour, before or after midday, is 20 degrees and about 51 minutes, and so for the others up to the hour of the equinoctial sunrise or sunset, where the said vertical circle terminates on both sides, which marks and shows that in the quadrant or vertical dial only the 6 equinoctial hours should be described.

[On the General Planisphere]
Inasmuch as just as the horizontal hourly arcs are parts or portions of the horizontal circle comprised between the hourly circles, and as the lines of the horizontal hours are the common sections of said hourly circles with the horizon: So also the vertical hourly arcs are portions of the vertical circle comprised between the said hourly circles, and the lines of the vertical hours are common sections of said circles with the said vertical. Therefore, the rule being situated and stopped, as prescribed in the preceding proposition to represent the horizon of a proposed place, it is necessary to imagine another line which, from the middle of the said rule or center of the said horizon, rising perpendicularly or at right angles, goes to meet the zenith of the said place, which represents the first or principal vertical circle passing through the said zenith and through the points of common section of the Equinoctial circle with the said horizon, on which vertical circle are, as stated, comprised and counted the vertical hourly arcs marked by the points of their common sections with the hourly circles. And as the point of each zenith is distant from the pole by the complement of the polar elevation on the horizon, which complement is equal to the Equinoctial elevation on the same horizon. Therefore, it is one and the same thing, or at least equal, that the Equinoctial elevation on the horizon and the polar elevation on the first and principal vertical circle; which the movable rule can easily represent, successively: Thus, counting from one or the other of the poles, their elevation on the said vertical circle, and transferring and stopping the rule there, it will represent the said vertical circle for the practice of the present proposition.

[Marking Hourly Circles on the Rule]
This being premised and practiced, or at least understood and supposed, the points through which the said hourly circles pass will be marked on the said rule, as in the preceding, and this counting from the meridian or outer circle, drawing towards and up to the center of the rule only, where the line representing the 6-hour circle passes (inasmuch as the plane of the said quadrant or vertical dial is only susceptible of 6 hours before and as many after midday). The rule thus marked, being transferred to the Equinoctial or direct horizon, will show between the said hourly circles the value of the required vertical hourly arcs.

[Example: Equinoctial Elevation]
Let, for example, the Equinoctial elevation for Paris be counted as 41 degrees 15 minutes from one or the other of the poles, and at the end of the numeration, the rule is guided and stopped, and on it is marked the point through which the 15th meridian or 1st hour circle before or after midday passes below the cut, and so for the other hours and their parts: then the rule being transferred to the Equinoctial will show between the same circles, between the extremity of the rule and the first point, 10 meridians and about 1/2 comprised, which give 10 degrees and about 10 minutes for the vertical hourly arc of 1 hour or 2 hours: and so for the others.

[III. PROPOSITION: Drawing Dials]
Given the horizontal or vertical hourly arcs, to draw a horizontal or vertical dial.

[Constructing a Dial]
Let two lines be drawn, cutting each other at right angles, one of which will represent the midday line, and the other the 6-hour line, and a compass point being placed and stopped on the point of their common section, let a circumference or portion of a circle be described with the other point, on which, with the aid of some divided quadrant or a proportional compass, the said known hourly arcs will be marked, and this counting on both sides of the midday line, then from the same point or center of the said circumference to the points of the arcs marked thereon, straight lines being drawn, these will be the required hourly lines, on which the shadow of the gnomon or style of the dial should mark the hours exactly; which needs no other example than the two following Figures, of which the first represents the said gnomon, style or banner, and the other the two dials, one vertical above, and the other horizontal below.

[Figure of the Gnomon]
Figure of the gnomon.

[Note I: Dial Placement]
It is to be noted that besides the construction of said dials as above, it is also necessary to know and understand their correct situation, and therefore for the horizontal dial, a very flat and level surface or parallel to the horizon will be chosen, on which, having drawn a meridian line, the said dial will be placed and affixed in such a way that its midday line corresponds precisely to the said meridian line. And for the vertical, an equal and flat surface will be chosen or erected, such as a perpendicular wall on the horizon, which faces directly South or North.

[Note II: Gnomon Construction]
It is also necessary, in addition to the constructions and positions above, to prepare a gnomon, or style indicating the hours by its shadow, which can be obtained by preparing a triangle similar to that which is made on the general planisphere by the rule with the 6-hour line in the constitution of the said rule, as it is prescribed in the first of these gnomonic proportions for the horizontal dial, and in the second, for the vertical, imagining a third line, which falls from the extremity of the said 6-hour line (that is to say, from the pole) perpendicularly onto the said rule; for having made a Gnomon or banner of iron, wood or other similar material to the said triangle, such as the one we have just represented above, and this gnomon being attached perpendicularly to the plane of the said dial, so that the angle which holds and is made at the center of the horizon or middle of the rule, is applied to the center of the dial: In this state, the shining Sun will mark by the shadow of the said gnomon (that is to say, by the shadow of its side which relates to the said triangle, to the 6-hour line, and represents both on the planisphere and on the said dial the axis of the world) the common equal hours required.

[IV. PROPOSITION: Vertical Plane Declination]
Given the declination of a vertical plane, to find the elevation of the pole on it, and the meridian line.

[Vertical Plane Declination]
We call the declination of a vertical plane, the inclination that a vertical plane, like a straight wall erected upon the horizon, has to the circle properly called vertical, that is to say, to the circle which, passing through the Zenith of some proposed place, terminates at the horizon at the points of the true equinoctial East and West; or else the indifference that there may be, that the proposed wall does not face directly South or North: and this inclination or difference can be known by means of a meridian line drawn near the wall, and continued up to it, of which mention was made in the 14th proposition above, or by means of a small compass and magnetized needle, whose declination is known and marked for the proposed place. And by the meridian line of the plane, we mean the line of common section of the meridian of the plane with the plane itself; and just as the meridian of the place, cutting the horizon at right angles, generates upon it a straight line called the meridian line of the place, so the meridian of the plane (which is a great circle passing through the poles of the world and cutting the said plane at right angles) generates upon it, by its common section, a line called the particular meridian line of the plane or the line of the style, in which, and upon which, the style, gnomon, triangle, or banner of the describable sundial must be erected and fixed.

[Calculating Pole Elevation on a Plane]
Suppose then that the declination of a wall is known; let it be counted among the azimuths from the point of common section of the oblique horizon with the Equinoctial, drawing towards the Northern part of the plate for a meridional plane, and towards the Southern for a septentrional plane, on the East side if the wall declines towards the East, or on the West side if the wall declines towards the West: and let that azimuth be marked, among the said azimuths, which meets at the end of the numeration; then let the rule be turned so that it is recognized to touch one of the Almucantaraths at the same point where it cuts the said marked azimuth, and let a point or line be made on the said rule precisely corresponding to the line of intersection; this done, let the rule be transferred to the meridian line, and count how many Almucantaraths will pass and be comprised from the center of the said rule, up to the said marked point on it, for this number will be the number of degrees of the height, or elevation of the pole on the said proposed plane. Likewise, the number of Almucantaraths, comprised from the one that was found to touch the rule up to the Zenith, will give the arc of the difference of the two meridian lines, of which one (namely, the true one of the place, always marked and represented by a line on the proposed plane falling perpendicularly on the horizon) being always supposed given and known, the other will be likewise.

[Example: Wall Declination in Paris]
For example, a wall presents itself in Paris, exposed to the North, but declining from the properly vertical by an angle of 71 degrees and 15 minutes towards the West. Counting then the said 71 degrees and 15 minutes among the azimuths, from the equinoctial point of the oblique horizon on the West side towards the South, or on the East side towards the North: The azimuth which meets at the end of this numeration represents the proposed plane, on which, moving the rule until it touches one of the Almucantaraths at the point of their common section (that is to say, at the same point where the said azimuth cuts both the rule and the said Almucantarath), this done, a point or line must be marked on the said rule precisely at the said point of tangency or common section, and count from the Zenith up to the said touched Almucantarath; doing this, 39 degrees and 50 minutes will be found, and such is the number of degrees for the arc of the difference of the two meridian lines, namely 39 degrees and 50 minutes. Then, turning and transferring the said rule to the meridian line, it is found that between its center and the said point marked on it, nearly 11 Almucantaraths pass, namely 11 and a half, which show that the arc of the Polar elevation on the said proposed plane is 11 degrees and 55 minutes, and such will be the height of the style or quantity of the angle of the gnomon, triangle, or banner that must be placed perpendicularly on the said meridian line of the plane.

[General Planisphere Calculation]
Let the declination of the plane be counted from the straight meridian, or 6 o'clock line which passes through the center, towards the exterior meridian (it does not matter from which side); and from the pole, let the elevation of the equinoctial be counted between the parallels, that is to say, the complement of the latitude, or polar elevation of the place where the said proposed plane is situated; and on the common intersection of the two, let the rule be drawn and fixed for the movable horizon, and on it let a point or mark be made at the place of the said intersection; then let the number of parallels comprised be counted on the limb from the same pole up to the extremity of the rule, and such will be the number of degrees for the arc of the difference of the two meridian lines; similarly, transferring the rule to the equinoctial or straight horizon, the number of meridians comprised from the said mark up to the nearest limb, or end and extremity of the rule, will give the number of degrees for the arc of the elevation of the pole on the said proposed plane.

[Example: Wall Declination in Paris (Planisphere)]
For example, another wall presents itself in Paris, whose declination is known to be 55 degrees and 45 minutes: On which, to describe a sundial, one wants to know the height of the pole and its meridian line, or the line of the style. Having therefore counted from the straight meridian, or 6 o'clock line, towards the exterior meridian, the proposed declination of 55 degrees and 45 minutes, and from the pole towards the equinoctial, the equinoctial elevation on the horizon of Paris of 41 degrees and 25 minutes: On the common meeting or intersection of the two, let the rule be drawn, and on it at the same place let a point or mark be made: then counting from the same pole up to the extremity of the said rule, one will find on the limb 55 degrees and 30 minutes: for the arc of the difference of the two meridian lines, and transferring the rule to the equinoctial or straight horizon, one will count from the said point marked on it up to its extremity 21 meridians and a half comprised, and consequently the arc of the elevation of the pole on the said proposed plane will be given as 11 degrees and 50 minutes.

[Finding Hour Arcs on a Vertical Plane]
Given the declination of a vertical plane, to find the arcs of the hours describable on it. This proposition is practiced in as many different ways as there can be different declinations presented, of which we will note a good part as follows. Having recognized, as said in the preceding proposition, among the Azimuths, the one that represents the proposed plane. Let the rule be drawn and fixed on the point where the said Azimuth cuts the Tropic of Cancer: for in this case it will show on the limb the last or first hour inscribable on the proposed plane, namely the last, if the said plane is Meridional, or Septentrional Oriental; and the first, if it is Meridional or Septentrional Occidental, indeed even both when the plane is Meridional, slightly declining towards East or West: which will be known when the Azimuth representing the proposed plane cuts the said Tropic of Cancer at two points above the horizon, and to have the first hour inscribable on a Meridional, or Septentrional Oriental plane, whose Azimuth is cut by the said Tropic of Cancer at only one point above the horizon (as are all Azimuths and vertical planes exceeding in declination the amplitude of the said Tropic or of the Sun in it), one must place the rule on the point of the oblique horizon, on the East side, where the said Tropic of Cancer cuts it, and it will mark on the limb the first hour or part of an hour inscribable on the said plane, that is to say, the hour or part when the Sun, on the longest day of the year, will begin to shine on it.

[Calculating Hour Arcs on a Plan]
on the said plane. Conversely, to find the last inscribable hour on a similar Meridional or Septentrional Occidental plane, one must place the rule on the oblique horizon on the Western side at the point where the said Tropic intersects it. And to find the hour arcs, that is to say, the quantity of degrees comprised by the arcs of the inscribable hours on the said plane, one must successively move and stop the rule on each hour of the limb, and note, as stated in the preceding propositions, on which Almicantarath it cuts the Azimuth representing the proposed plane, counting from the Zenith: the number of Almicantaraths comprised between the Zenith and the point where the rule cuts the proposed Azimuth will be the number of degrees of which each hour arc will be composed, always counting from the meridian line and from its top downwards (that is, from the Zenith towards the Nadir, since the Almicantaraths have been counted from the Zenith of the plate, extending towards the horizon) and this by means of a circle which will be drawn on the said proposed plane, whose center will be taken on the meridian line. With this caution, however, that when the rule, being situated on the hour whose arc is sought, does not cut the proposed Azimuth at two points above the horizon, but only at one towards midday, in this case it will be necessary to take the number of Almicantaraths comprised on the midday side, or towards the Armilla, between the point where the rule cuts the said Azimuth and the oblique horizon, and this number added to the 90 Almicantaraths comprised on the other side between the Zenith and the same oblique horizon, to compose the entire arc of the said hour, whose term will always end in the said case below the horizontal line of the dial, that is to say, the line of the said hour drawn from the center of the dial through the point on the said circle terminating its hour arc, will always in the said case be drawn below the horizontal line of the said dial: We will demonstrate all this with an example.

[Example: North-West Wall in Paris]
EXAMPLE. Let a North-West wall in Paris be proposed, that is to say, a wall or other surface perpendicular to the horizon exposed to the North, but declining towards the West by 71 degrees 15 minutes. Having counted this declination among the Azimuths from the equinoctial Azimuth on the West side, up to the 71st, and towards midday, the said 71st will represent the proposed wall plane. To find and know the inscribable hour arcs on the said plane, let the rule be placed on the point of the Tropic of Cancer where the found Azimuth passes, and it will show on the limb about 3/4 of an hour, that is to say, about 36 minutes of an hour after midday, and at this hour the Sun on the longest day will begin to shine on the face of the said proposed plane; of which the arc to be taken from the top of the meridian line downwards, will be composed of 65 and 3/4 Almicantaraths comprised from the said point up to the oblique horizon, and of the 90 Almicantaraths comprised on the other side from the said oblique horizon up to the Zenith of the plate, and therefore it will be 155 and 3/4 degrees. And the said hour line will be depressed below the horizontal line of the describable dial, by an angle of as many degrees as the Sun, being in the said Tropic, and beginning to shine on the said plane, is found elevated above the horizon, namely 63 and 3/4 degrees. The arcs of the other hours will be found in the same way, by successively transferring the rule to the hours of the limb, marking the points through which it passes on the said Azimuth, and counting the Almicantaraths comprised between the said points and the Zenith of the plate, thus for one hour with 90 degrees above the horizontal line, there will still be found about 33 and 3/4 degrees below, which will compose the arc of 123 and 3/4 degrees for the line of 1 hour after midday; for 2 hours, the rule will show among the Almicantaraths about 74 and 1/2, and between the Zenith of the plate and the point where the aforesaid Azimuth passes; therefore the arc of 2 hours after midday, will be about 74 degrees 41 minutes. Thus that of 3 will be found to be about 58 degrees 16 minutes, that of 4 about 50 degrees 55 minutes, that of 5 about 46 degrees 5 minutes, that of 6 about 42 degrees 20 minutes, that of 7 about 39 degrees 18 minutes; and finally the rule being on the intersection of the Tropic of Cancer with the oblique horizon will show 8 hours for the last inscribable hour, whose arc will be known to be about 36 degrees by as many Almicantaraths as will be found comprised on the said Azimuth between the rule and the Zenith of the plate.

[General Planisphere Difficulties]
Concerning the General Planisphere. Because the practice of this proposition on the general Planisphere is enveloped in difficulty, and moreover still requires knowledge of the angle comprised by the meridian of the plane with that of the place, that is to say, the hourly difference of the proper meridian of the plane with the meridian of the place, which serves as a common and necessary prosthaphaeresis to arrive at the knowledge of the hour arcs, we will refrain from presenting its exposition here so as not to become tedious in the deduction of the particular means that must be employed. Also, by means of the preceding propositions alone, well understood, everyone will be able to easily construct and understand the reason for the construction of a sundial on any proposed vertical plane, whatever its declination, as well as on any plane inclined to the meridian and to the horizon, but straight to the circle properly called vertical, considering that what the declination of the plane is to verticals, horizontal inclination is to horizontals, and thus, by merely permuting one for the other, the rest of the practice and procedure will be entirely similar.

[Constructing a Sundial on a Given Plane]
PROPOSITION VI. Given a plane whose declination is known, together with the height of the Pole upon it, and its meridian line, with the hour arcs, to describe a sundial upon it. Although it is not our intention in this addition of propositions concerning Gnomonics or the theory of Sundials, to treat the methods of constructing them, which is a subject that well deserves to be reserved and destined for another place than this one: but only to make known and understood that just as in the solid and material Sphere all the theory of gnomonics is considered, so also in the Astrolabe, which is the projection of the Sphere onto a plane, the same thing can be considered and known. Nevertheless, we have added this last proposition to provide the method of putting into practice and use the knowledge of these last two propositions, as in the third we did for the first two. Let there be then on a line A. B, drawn to represent the meridian line, at a point C. on it as a center, described a circumference K. B. L. on which divided (either by means of a divided quadrant, or with a compass).

[Drawing Hour Lines on Declining Dials]
of proportion) are taken and marked on both sides, if necessary, counting from line A.B. the hourly arcs found by the preceding proportion, as at points D. E. F. G. etc. From the center C, lines C D. C E. C F. etc. will be drawn to these points, which will be the hour lines or common intersections of the hourly circles with the proposed plane. Then, on the same circumference, counting again from the same line A.B., the arc of the difference between the meridian line of the plane and that of the place is taken and marked, and at the end R. from the same center C. a line C R. is drawn, which will be the meridian line of the plane, or the style line. From this line, taking again on the same circumference (on either side, it does not matter) the arc of the elevation of the pole above the said plane, as R. S. and at the end S. drawing from the center C. a line C. S. this line, elevated above the said plane, according to the angle R.CS. will represent the axis of the world, and will give the height of the style or gnomon, which must be elevated perpendicularly above the said meridian line of the plane C. R. and whose shadow will mark the equal hours of the day on the aforesaid lines: which the following Figure, conforming to the example of the preceding proposition, will make known.

[Declining Horologe]
We do not speak here of horologes describable on inclined and declining planes, as this is a matter of too high speculation for this treatise and because it is necessary to consider in imagination many circles not described on Astrolabes. Also, after a strong speculation and clear knowledge of the preceding propositions, one can by oneself proceed to the research of the diverse and different encounters that are made of the circles and considerable lines in gnomonics on whatever kinds of planes they may be, however bizarre they may be. End of Gnomonic Propositions.

[Second Treatise of the Astrolabe]
THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE ASTROLABE. Containing the Use of Geometric Dimensions by the Altimetric Scale, or Geometric Quadrant described on its back, Astrolabe. After having sufficiently declared the use of the Astrolabe, insofar as it concerns cosmographical speculation: it remains to deduce the use of the Altimetric Scale or Geometric Quadrant described on the back of the said Astrolabe.

[Use and Utility of the Scale]
This Scale has two equal sides elevated perpendicularly one above the other, and is placed double, namely one in each quadrant of the back below the horizon, of which the lower part, crossing the line of midnight, is called shadow or straight scale, which is made by bodies elevated straight above the earth, such as a tower, and other similar things: And the other, which descends from the horizon on this straight scale equidistant from the line of midnight, is called inverse or inverted shadow, which is made by a body equidistant from the surface of the earth, as would be a pole fixed in a wall on which the Sun shines. And the said scales have 12 points (or rather degrees or divisions) by the proportion of which we understand the things we want to measure to be divided into similar numbers and proportions. Furthermore, the rule on the back takes the place of the visual line, that is to say, that which extends from the center of the eye to the summit of the terminated thing, or rather represents the ray of the Sun which touches the upper end of the thing one wants to measure, ending on the surface of the horizon. Similarly, the line of midnight which descends through the center of the Astrolabe, represents to us the things that are measured, and is placed in the place of heights and depths.

[Quantity and Proportion of Measures]
Before descending to the practice of measurements, it will be convenient to declare the quantity and proportion of those commonly used. And before that, it is necessary to understand that the dimension of things is found in three differences. The first is called Altimeter, by which all simple lengths are measured, such as the height of a tower, the length of a field, the distance between cities and other longitudes. The other is Planimeter, which is done in length and width, such as surveying land, and all other superficial measures. The third is Stereometer, or Solidimeter, which is in width, length, and depth: which belongs to solid bodies, vessels containing oils, wines, grains, and other similar things. Of these differences, in the use of the Astrolabe, only the first, which is simple, is commonly treated, by which the height of towers, trees, columns, the length of a field, the width of a river, the depth of a well, and other similar things are measured.

[Three Types of Dimensions]
These three types of dimension and measure, of which Jacquinot speaks, consider the three sorts of quantities that can be presented for measurement, namely lines, surfaces, and bodies. The manner of measuring surfaces is quite appropriately named Planimeter, from a name composed of Latin and Greek, and consists in measuring all terminated quantities that have length or width, such as all kinds of areas, spaces and superficial capacities, acres, perches and feet of land, plans of some cities and buildings, or other surfaces. The measure of bodies or solids is commonly called Stereometer or Solidimeter (not Solimeter, as Jacquinot and Robert too barbarously call it) and consists in measuring all solid quantities, and which have the three dimensions, namely length, width, and height or depth: such as all solid bodies, capacities of vessels, thickness of walls, and others of whatever material they may be. The measure of lines is called by Jacquinot Altimeter, as if to say measure of height (of which the Geometric Quadrant added to the back of Astrolabes, is vulgarly called altimetric scale) but inasmuch as the measure of lines consists as much in measuring those which are found extended in length on a horizontal or inclined plane to the horizon, as those which are elevated in perpendicular height: We therefore say that this kind of dimension requires a more significant name than that of Altimeter, and perhaps it would not be out of place to call it Mecometer, that is to say, consisting in the measure of all kinds of terminated lengths, and it is this Greek name derived from μήκος, that is to say length, which is the only dimension of lines such as the height of a tower, the length of a wall, and a simple distance from one city to another.

[Common Measures and Their Divisions]
To measure in this manner is therefore to know how many famous measures the line between the extremities of this length contains. We call famous measures those which have less inequality between them, and are more known to man, such as fingers, feet, paces, and other measures composed of them. What is to be understood by famous measures are all vulgar and commonly used measures, as being the most notorious, ordinary and current, as in Paris the toise is renowned for buildings and places: for the countryside, the perch: for merchandise, the ell: and for common measure, as a rule and justification of others, the King's foot: such will be in Paris, and in the surroundings, the famous measures. Elsewhere there may be others which will be so called, as the most notorious and used. It is very true that often in the absence of such certain and determined measures, recourse is had to others less certain, but more prompt and easy, such as paces, common and vulgar feet, arms, and others that one willingly equates to some of the aforesaid famous and certain measures. Therefore, it must be understood that a finger is the interval of four grains of barley laid out in width, and not in length. The Palm is composed of 4 fingers. The Foot of 4 Palms, or 16 fingers. The Cubit of one and a half Feet. The Toise of 6 Feet.

[Units of Measurement]
The rod or pole of 2 paces, or of 10 feet. The stadium of 125 paces. The Italian mile of 8 stadia, or 1000 paces. The French league is made of 2 miles. And although men's feet are found to be unequal, nevertheless it is customary to choose a proper one, by the proportion of which lands, buildings, and other public measures of a country are measured. This Foot, of which Jacquinot speaks here, is the Foot called the King's foot, or Parisian foot: but the division he gives of it into palms and inches is not currently in use. That is why we have added here another King's foot divided into three, with its common divisions of a cubit, by which one will know that the said King's foot, or Parisian foot (the common rule for all other measures of Paris and almost all of France) is composed of 12 inches, and each inch of 12 lines, each of which is estimated to have the length in diameter of a grain of barley taken according to its width divisible into other 12 parts, and so continuing always by continual subdivision in duodecimal progression: And even if such subdivision is not sensible nor cited below the said lines, it is nevertheless considerable and often necessary for encountering fractions. On the other side, opposite this division, we have placed that of the decimal, by which in continuous decimal progression the foot will be known to be divided into 10 first parts, and each first into 10 seconds, and each second again further divided into 10 thirds, and so continuously. And this last division is more prompt and easy for calculation than any other, as will be seen noted hereafter in its place on the use and practice of the geometric square marked on our small astrolabes that we have had divided in similar decimal progression. And no small advantage will be found in this conformity of division between the measured measure and the square, by means of which all the parts of one are always equally proportioned to the parts of the other. For in a word, it is to divide the measure by a division similar to that of the geometric square or altimeter scale.

[Geometric Square Proposition]
Regarding the Geometric Square. PROPOSITION Of the Geometric Square. To find the height of a tower, or other thing by the shadow of the Sun. Know that when the sun is elevated by 45 degrees, by the 5th proposition of the first treatise (which is only done in our region when the sun is in one of the first six signs of the Zodiac), then the sun renders the shadows exactly equal to their bodies, and the rule touches the 12th point of the scale between the direct and inverted shadow.

[Jacquinot's Statement on Solar Altitude]
What Jacquinot says here is true, that the height of the sun above the horizon of that region (like Paris and other places situated under the same parallel) cannot rise to 45 degrees, unless the sun is in one of the first signs of the Zodiac, that is to say, in one of the northern signs. Even elsewhere than in these signs, the sun cannot reach such a meridian height: because with the equinoctial height for Paris of 48 degrees 15 minutes, it still needs 3 degrees 45 minutes of northern declination of the sun to compose a meridian height of 45 degrees. Now this declination only corresponds to about 9 degrees 30 minutes of Aries, and about 10 degrees 30 minutes of Virgo; and therefore the sun cannot have 45 degrees of height, neither meridian, nor (for stronger reason) at any other hours of the day, unless it is in some degree of the Zodiac between the said 9°30' Aries and 10°30' Virgo. This occurs from the end of March until about the 12th of September. We note here first the great impertinence of Robert and others who have improperly falsified and changed Jacquinot's original text, having substituted a vicious restriction instead of a true consequence after the conclusion. For Jacquinot having said that the Sun, being elevated by 45 degrees, makes the shadows equal to their bodies, instead of what follows, that in this case the rule touches the 12th point of the scale between the direct and inverted shadow (that is to say, divides the geometric square into two equally): these good doctors have changed and substituted that they understand these things in countries that have the same latitude as Paris, as if this conclusion of Jacquinot was not absolutely true and universal, that the Sun elevated above any horizon by 45 degrees makes the shadows equal to their bodies.

[Shadows and Solar Altitude]
It is indeed true, however, that Jacquinot drew as a consequence what should have been considered first. For taking the height of the Sun with the Astrolabe, when it reaches 45 degrees, we first know that the rule falls exactly between the two scales of direct and inverted shadow, that is to say, it divides the geometric square into two equally; and from there we draw a true consequence, that the sun's ray represented by the rule, will cut, or rather will comprise in the same ratio the body and its shadow, as the rule comprises the lower side of the square representing the shadow, and the side that falls perpendicularly from the center of the said rule, which represents the body; the two triangles being similar, and therefore having their sides proportional. But in the small triangle on the Astrolabe, the lower side parallel and analogous to the shadow, is equal to the side that falls from the center of the rule parallel to the body: therefore in the large triangle the shadow will be equal to its body, in the said case of the sun's elevation of 45 degrees. The sun then being found by the Astrolabe, or otherwise, at the said height of 45 degrees above the horizon, if at the same instant one marks the extremity of the shadow of some upright elevated body, the measure, in length, of the shadow will be approximately the measure, in height, of the body. But for the less advanced, it is still necessary to say why, at such a sun height of 45 degrees, the rule divides the geometric square exactly in two, and is found stopped on the middle line or of the mean shadow. This is because the geometric square being inscribed in one of the quadrants of the back of the Astrolabe, and consequently in a quarter circle composed of 90 equal parts, the two sides of the said square being by its construction made equal and equally distant from the center of the Astrolabe, that is to say, from the center of the said quarter circle, it necessarily follows that they will meet on the said quarter circle each a point equally distant from their original lines, that is to say, that the side of the direct shadow, elevated on the line falling perpendicularly from the center to the horizon, will meet a point on the said quarter circle as distant from the said perpendicular line, as the point that the other side of the inverted shadow, elevated on the horizontal line, will meet on the said quarter circle, will be from the same horizontal line: and therefore the line drawn from the center through the concurrence of the said two sides of the square, that is to say, the diagonal line of the square, or line of the mean shadow: will also meet the said quarter circle at a point equally distant from the said two perpendicular and horizontal lines: and consequently it will cut the said quarter circle into two equal parts each of 45 degrees. Therefore, by contrary reason, whenever the sun or other luminous body is found elevated by 45 degrees, and therefore the rule is found stopped on the middle point of the said quarter circle, it will divide the said geometric square equally in two, making two right-angled triangles, similar and equal, whose sides will also be equal: and therefore the side of the direct shadow, equal to the side of the inverted shadow; but in the observation the side touching the geometric square.

[Shadows and their Bodies]
the side of the right shadow is parallel and analogous to the shadow of a body, and the side of the inverse shadow is parallel and analogous to the body, just as the rule is to the ray: therefore, the two sides of the shadow being made equal, it necessarily follows that the shadows also be made equal to their bodies.

[Measuring Heights with the Astrolabe]
It still remains, it seems, to say that just as, to justly observe the line which, forming one of the sides of the geometric square, falls from the center of the Astrolabe downwards, must be perpendicular to the horizon; and that which crosses it at the said center, forming the other side of the said square, must be well parallel to the horizon; (which happens when the said lines are well perpendicular one upon the other, and the Astrolabe is suspended in equilibrium) so also, to measure well, it is presupposed that the height one wishes to measure is perpendicular or elevated straight above the horizon: and the surface, upon which its shadow is projected and extended, is equal, well unified, and level, that is to say, chosen parallel to the horizon. And the more exactly these precautions are observed in the practice of all the proportions of this treatise, the more justly one will operate, and the more precise and exact measurements one will obtain.

[Note on Shadow Equality]
NOTE. We have said here that the shadow made by the sun elevated 45 degrees above the horizon is only approximately equal to its body; which is true regarding the apparent diameter of the luminous body, such as the sun and the moon. It would be otherwise if the light proceeded as from a single point. And therefore, in the practice of these propositions by means of the sun, it would be necessary, to have a just and precise measurement, to find at the extremity of the shadow the point that corresponds to the midpoint of the sun's body, that is to say, the extremity in the shadow where the ray that proceeds from it terminates, the sun being elevated 45 degrees, remaining extended with respect to the said midpoint. Because at the same time, and on the same plane, the upper part of the sun's body being more elevated, causes a shorter right shadow, and the lower part causes a longer inverse shadow, which this figure that we have added will easily make understood by the distinction we have made there of the three considerable rays.

[Geometric Square and Shadow Types]
Regarding the Geometric square, Jacquinot, speaking throughout this geometric treatise of the right shadow and the inverse shadow, was content to have simply said at the beginning which side of the square is called the right shadow, and which the inverse shadow, without giving the reason. To better explain the matter, we say that of the two sides of the geometric square divided into equal parts, one falling perpendicular to the horizon is called the scale of the inverse or reverted shadow, and the other parallel to the horizon is called the scale of the right shadow, for which the common reason given is that the right shadow is that which proceeds from a body, whether it be a pillar or other thing elevated straight above the horizon: and the inverse shadow is that which proceeds from a body, whether it be a pillar or other thing inverted and lying parallel to the horizon: but it seems to us that a better reason can be given for these two appellations of shadows; moreover, often the shadow of a body perpendicular to the horizon is projected in the form of an inverse shadow on a plane also perpendicular; and conversely, that of a body lying on the horizon is projected and received on a horizontal plane in the form of a right shadow: and therefore we say that this diverse appellation of shadow does not depend so much on the opaque body and the plane on which its shadow is projected, as on the luminous body and its ray; so that the ray being direct, the shadow will be called direct, and the ray being inclined, inverted, and bent, the shadow will be called inverse or reverted. Now, as the light, which we assume to be from the Sun, being perpendicular to a straight elevated body, the shadow does not appear, and is entirely straight like the body; and conversely, the light being at its greatest inclination, and as it were entirely inverted, its ray is entirely bent and inverted, and the shadow appears as infinite and entirely inverted; also, there is a midpoint between these two extremities where the light being constituted, its ray will be said to be moderately inclined, and the shadow also called a mean shadow. Such a ray being represented by the diagonal of the geometric square, it is vulgarly called the line of the mean shadow, which, when produced, divides the quadrant equally. Such a shadow is called a shadow of 45 degrees, equal in length to the height of its body, so that the light rising further, and its ray consequently straightening little by little until it becomes perpendicular, the shadow, from being mean, is made straighter, and consequently called right; or on the other side, the light inclining further, and inverting towards the horizon, its ray is more bent and inverted, and consequently the shadow is called inverted, notwithstanding that being received on a plane perpendicular to the horizon it shortens as the ray inclines or inverts further; for the change of plane is only for convenience and to retain within the capacity of some place or instrument, the shadows which otherwise, caused by much inclined and inverted rays, would produce and continue to infinity.

[Geometric Square and Shadow Analogy]
Another reason for this diverse appellation of shadow, drawn from the very practice of the geometric square, can still be noted here. This is that the light being elevated more than 45 degrees above the horizon, and the alidade always cutting, in this case, the lower part of the geometric square, the shadow of a perpendicular body is always analogous to the parts cut by the alidade, as the body is to the whole number of the altimeter scale, that is to say, to the side of the square that descends from the center of the Astrolabe. And this by reason of the conformity of the two triangles made, in this case, similar and similarly positioned. But the light being more inclined and inverted over the horizon than 45 degrees, and consequently the shadows being made longer than the height of their bodies, in this case, there is an inversion of the position of the small triangle on the geometric square, and consequently of the analogy: for the shadow, in this said case, is made analogous and proportional to the entire side of the square, that is to say, to the entire number of the scale, as the body is to the parts cut by the alidade. Above 45 degrees, by conformity and similar position of the two triangles, the direct analogy of the body to the entire side of the square, and of the shadow to the cut parts, is instituted; this shadow is called a right shadow: but below 45 degrees, because of the inversion that occurs in the position of the small triangle, and of the analogy and proportion of the body to the cut parts and of the shadow to the entire side, this shadow is called inverse or reverted.

[Measuring Heights at 45 Degrees]
II. PROPOSITION. To know the height. This proposition is that when the Sun is not at 45 degrees, or at other times, whether morning or other, you wish to measure heights, you must place the back of the rule on the elevation of 45 degrees, or on the 11th point of the scale, between the right and inverse shadow; then, holding your Astrolabe justly suspended by its ring with your hand, you will approach or move away from the thing you are measuring, until through the sight of the rule you see its summit. Having done this, you will see that the space between you and its base is equal to its height, adding that of your eye, because it is not on the surface of the earth.

[Geometric Square: Visual Ray and Shadow]
It is true that this proposition is more universal and more reliable in operation than the preceding one, because it can be practiced at all times, in all places, and at all hours; and besides, it is not subject to the inconveniences noted in the remark on the preceding one, supposing always that the Astrolabe is always well rectified, and the place chosen for such observation is perfectly level and parallel to the horizon. And in this second method of measurement, the visual ray passing through the two pinnules of the Alidade, and terminating from one end at the eye of the measurer, and from the other at the extremity of the height to be measured, represents the sun's ray in the preceding proposition: and the distance from the measurer to the thing to be measured takes the place of the shadow, shortened nevertheless in this proposition by the height of the measurer. Furthermore, the Astrolabe or other instrument applied in this observation does not vary in any way; it remains in the same state for one and the other of these two propositions; or just as the fiducial line is midway between two equal sides of the geometric square, so the visual ray is midway between two equal quantities, one of which is the distance from the eye of the measurer, and the other the height of the thing to be measured above the measurer.

[Eye Height Correction in Measurement]
What Jacquinot says here, that one must add the height of the eye, because it is not on the surface of the earth, is also true and necessary in almost all the following propositions, where mention will be made of the measurement of some height, which can be easily understood by the figure above, where it is seen that the eye of the measurer prevents the diagonal ray between the height and the distance from being prolonged to the surface of the earth, on which the measurement is made and taken, and not in the air the height of the eye: also, instead of forming a triangle similar and proportional to that which is made on the Astrolabe by the fiducial line, with two sides of the geometric square, only a part is formed which represents a trapezoid. But inasmuch as the distance from the eye of the measurer to the thing to be measured is or should always be equal to the distance of his feet (supposing that the measurer must always stand upright, making the observation), if one imagines a straight line drawn from the eye of the measurer to the thing to be measured which is parallel to the surface chosen for the distance, that line will form with the visual ray, and a part of the height to be measured, a triangle similar to that which is formed on the geometric square of the Astrolabe, of which all the sides will be known in similar and equal measures to that by which the distance will have been measured; just as all the sides of the small triangle formed on the Astrolabe are known in measures of the degrees of the square or altimeter scale. And then, since the line of the eye's distance is parallel to that of the feet's distance, and since the eye's height and the height to be measured are perpendicular to the horizon, and therefore parallel to each other, the line of the eye's distance will cut off from the thing to be measured a height equal to that of the eye, and therefore known, since that of the eye is always supposed known; which, added to the rest of the said height comprised within the said triangle, and known by observation, will give the entire height known in measures of the distance and of the eye's height. Note: We have said here, supposing that the measurer always stands upright during the observation. That is to say, that the height of his eye is perpendicular to the ground of the distance of his feet.

[Precision in Measurement]
Inasmuch as it is impossible for the measurement to be taken accurately if this precaution is not observed. Therefore, to avoid this inconvenience, two things are absolutely necessary: either that the distance is always taken from the point where the perpendicular line from the eye falls on the surface where the distance is measured; or (and this is the most reliable) that the height of the eye is always taken at the center of the Astrolabe or geometric square, and the distance from the point where the perpendicular from the said center falls on the same surface: for in this case, the measurer can take convenience for the observation, and it will not matter where his eye is, provided that it is on the visual line of the Alidade, that is to say, the one which, passing through the two apertures of the pinnules, will meet and join the extremity of the height to be measured.

[Measuring Height with Two Rods]
III. PROPOSITION. To find the height of a tower without an Astrolabe, using two rules or rods. Although this proposition and some others following it are not for the use of the Astrolabe, we have added them here to measure heights, and to use them in default of the said instrument. You will therefore take two rules, one half the size of the other, and you will raise them on a flat place, placing the small one as far from the other as its own size, which can be measured by a third rule that will join them at right angles: then you will look at the tower through the top of the said rules, approaching or moving away until you see its summit: and the distance between the said small rule and the foot of the tower will be the measure of its height, by only adding the quantity of the said small rule.

[Notes on Measuring with Two Rods]
This proposition and the following one, added here by Jacquinot outside the use of the Astrolabe, can serve just as well for measuring distances in length as for heights: and for the practice of this one, it will first be noted that the two rules or rods must be raised perfectly straight and perpendicular on a very even place and parallel to the horizon: but as for their length, it is not absolutely necessary that one be half the other; this subjection would be more troublesome than useful, as David Robert's annotations on this passage, where he took great pains to make us understand the design and arrangement of Jacquinot's trivial, common, and easy figure, instead of giving us any reason for it, or noting the defect found in Jacquinot's text, which we will show needs to be reformed and clarified for those who are newly initiated or little practiced and understood in this practice.

[Rod Lengths for Measurement]
We say then, first, concerning the lengths, that it does not matter whether one of the rules is more or less than double the length of the other: inasmuch as it will rarely happen that two rules or rods are found such that one is double the other, that they can be erected and fixed on a plane without some aid or support from elsewhere; for in this case, to take their distance from the length of the small one as Jacquinot and Robert wish, in which case two rules, one less or more than double the length of the other, could also serve promptly and easily, there being no difference except in their distance, which would be taken equal to the excess of the larger over the smaller.

[Measuring Height with Two Unequal Rods]
Therefore, whenever one wishes to practice this proposition, it will suffice that the two rods are simply unequal, one being larger than the other. And whether one wishes to fix them in the ground or simply erect and lean them against a plane, care must be taken that the smaller one is fixed and distanced from the larger one such that their distance is equal to the excess of the larger over the smaller. For in this case, if the eye is placed on the line connecting the extremities of the said two rods, and one sees the summit of some elevated body, such as a pyramid, tower, or other thing, one can say that the distance between the small rod or staff and the tower will be equal to the height of the tower. But if one does not precisely perceive the summit of the said tower at the first attempt, it will be useless to do what Jacquinot teaches, which is to approach or move away until one can see it through the extremities of the said rods, unless at the same time one approaches or moves away the two elevated and erected rods as said, without changing anything of their distance or constitution. For it is the line connecting the extremities of the two rods that must be directed to the summit of the tower. This being a lengthy process if the two rods are not attached together or elevated and erected on a movable plane: to avoid this inconvenience, we will give another method to practice this proposition, which will be general, quicker, and easier.

[Alternative Method for Height Measurement]
Let two staffs (rods or staves) be taken, one longer than the other. And having fixed and erected the longer one perpendicularly on a very even piece of ground, let the smaller one also be erected and fixed at whatever distance one wishes, so that by the extremities of the two staffs one can perceive the extremity of the height to be measured, such as the summit of a tower or other thing. Then the distance between the tower and the smaller staff will have such a ratio and proportion to the height of the tower above the said smaller staff, as the distance between the two staffs has to the excess of the longer over the smaller. For example, if the said distance between the two staffs is found to be double, triple, half, or a quarter of the said excess, the measured distance between the tower and the smaller staff will be double, triple, half, or a quarter of the height of the said tower above the said smaller staff. And when the said distance between the staffs is found to be equal to the excess, the distance from the tower to the smaller staff will be equal to the height of the tower above the said smaller staff. Therefore, by always adding the height of the said smaller staff, one will have the entire height of the tower measured quite precisely and promptly.

[Measuring Length with Two Rods]
NOTE. As in the figure above, the eye being applied on the side of the smaller staff, the visual ray extends upwards to measure some height. Similarly, the eye applied on the side of the longer staff, the visual ray will extend downwards, terminating a length on the horizontal surface. Thus, when one wishes to measure some length and distance, the two staffs being fixed at whatever distance one wishes, the longer one will be advanced or withdrawn from the ground, so that through the two extremities of the two staffs the eye can precisely see the target of the length or distance to be measured. Then, whatever proportion the excess of the longer staff has to the distance or separation of the two, such will be the entire height of the said longer staff to its distance from the proposed target, that is to say, to the distance and length to be measured. For example, if the said excess is only a third, a quarter, a sixth, or a twelfth of the separation of the two staffs, the height of the longer one will be a third, a quarter, a sixth, or a twelfth of the length to be measured.

[Jacquinot's Method with a Single Rod]
NOTE II. To aid and make easier the method given by Jacquinot for practicing this proposition, we will also say that a single staff will suffice, of whatever length one desires. Having pierced it near one end, so that a small rod, as long as the part of the larger one from the hole to its extremity, can be passed through the hole or at least fixed at right angles. For to measure some height, one will approach or move back the said staff, fixing it upright in the ground, until the eye can perceive the summit of the thing to be measured through the two extremities. Then the distance between it and the staff will be equal to its height above the said staff. Therefore, by adding the height of the said staff, one will have the entire height of the proposed thing to be measured. This can also be practiced for measuring a length.

[Measuring Height with a Mirror]
III. PROPOSITION. Otherwise with a mirror. Place your mirror on the ground, straight and level, as far from your feet as the height of your eyes. And if it pleases you, attach it to the end of a rod, then look diligently into the said mirror, approaching or moving away (always maintaining the distance) until you see the summit of the tower in the mirror. After that, measure the space between the mirror and the base of the tower, and thus you will have its height justly, without adding anything to it.

[Mirror Method: Proportionality]
Generally, when looking at a tower in a mirror, the proportion that the space between your foot and the mirror bears to the height of the eye, will be the same proportion that the distance between the mirror and the base of the tower bears to its height. The same things are to be observed here as in the preceding method: namely, that this approaching or moving away of the thing to be measured must be understood as applying to both the mirror and the measurer together, as if the said mirror were attached to some staff or rod, so that the measurer, by approaching, can make the said mirror approach or recede without changing the equality of the distance, that is to say, always observing that the distance between the measurer's feet and the mirror is equal to the height of his eye. And this is to find a distance from the mirror equal to the height of the thing to be measured, assuming that the mirror is very flat and even, without waves, bumps, or cavities, and is laid on a very even plane parallel to the horizon. For with a convex mirror, there would be a great difference, if it were not handled by a measurer as expert in the knowledge of mirrors as in the art of measuring. We note this so that Jacquinot's figure, which represents a convex mirror, does not mislead those less versed in these exercises, making them believe that it is indifferent whether one uses a flat or a convex mirror; as also to warn that absolutely all wavy and uneven mirrors are unsuitable for such exercises.

[Mirror Method: Point of Observation]
NOTE. It must be noted here that according to the size of the mirror, there can be a difference in the measurement. Therefore, to avoid this inconvenience, one must always observe that the same point of the mirror taken for the distance, either of the thing to be measured or of the measurer, is the same point through which one sees, that is to say, the one that reflects the extremity of the thing to be measured to the eye. And therefore, for more certainty, one should willingly use a marked point in the middle of the mirror.

[Measuring Horizontal Distances with a Mirror]
We have said that this proposition can serve to measure certain horizontal lengths, because if one attaches a flat mirror to a staff fixed upright in the ground, such that the plane of the mirror is perpendicular to the plane of the horizon, and one looks at some target for a proposed distance or length, the eye being as elevated above the point of the mirror that reflects the said target (that is to say, above the horizontal line that passes through and traverses the mirror at the point of reflection) as it is distant from the plane of the mirror: the height of the said point on the mirror above the plane of the horizon will be equal to the distance of the said target marked on the same horizontal plane. Likewise, there will always be the same proportion of the height of the eye above the said point of reflection to its distance from the mirror, as there is of the height of the said point on the horizon to the distance the mirror has from the target marked as the end of some proposed distance and length.

[Practical Use of the Flat Mirror]
We have also deemed it worthy of remark here, concerning the subject and in favor of the flat mirror, that most, indeed all, of the propositions in this present treatise can be very easily, promptly, and accurately practiced with it: provided that it is handled with extreme care, which we can demonstrate in the method of measuring, with a single placement of the measurer and a single position of the mirror, the distance and height of some tower surrounded by water or otherwise inaccessible. To this tower, at whatever distance it may be, having opposed a flat mirror attached to a staff, such that its plane is plumb and perpendicular to the horizon, the measurer seeing the foot of the said tower, by the preceding Note, will know the distance, always proportional to the height of the mirror, as the height of his eye above the point of reflection is to its distance from the mirror. Then, the gaze being lowered a little until the measurer perceives the summit of the tower, whatever proportion he finds of his distance from the mirror to the lowering of his eye below the horizontal line of the point of reflection, such will he judge and know to be the distance he found between the mirror and the tower, to the height of the tower above the same point of reflection; therefore, by adding the height of the said point of reflection, he will have the exact total height of the tower, and this from a single station and a single position of the mirror. This we do not find to have been remarked by anyone yet, not even by Father Clavius in his compendium of Altilongimetric methods, although the thing is easy to practice and of quite notable effect. See the following figure.

[Finding Heights with Shadows]
To know daily the height of bodies elevated above the horizon, place yourself in a flat area, and on a table, stool, or other object, fix a rod very straight. Then wait until the shadow is as long as the body of the said rod. Then mark the end of the shadow you measure, and the object to be measured will have as much height as there are measures between its foot and the point marked at the extremity of its shadow.

[Accurate Shadow Measurement]
The surest and quickest practice of this is to draw a circle on a flat plane, level and parallel to the horizon, and at the center, perpendicularly erect a gnomon, staff, or rod of the length of the semidiameter of the circle, that is to say, of the compass opening that traced the circle: for when the shadow of the said gnomon terminates at the said circle, it will infallibly be as long as the gnomon is high. And therefore, marking at the same time a point at the extremity of the shadow of that whose height one wishes to know, the measure of the said shadow will give the height of its body. If, dividing the height of the gnomon or rod into several equal parts, one traces several circles both inside and outside the aforesaid, distant from each other by the quantity of one of the said parts, by the known proportion of their semidiameters to the height of the gnomon, when the sun's shadow terminates in any of these circles, one will have at the same time the proportion of all shadows to the height of their bodies.

[Heights When Sun is Below 45 Degrees]
For this, it must be noted that whenever the height of the Sun is taken and it is found to be less than 45 degrees, the lower part of the rule will always fall on the inverse scale: and then the shadows of bodies perpendicularly elevated above the horizon are longer than their height, in such a proportion that 12 exceeds the number of points touched by the rule.

[Example: Shadow Length Calculation]
EXAMPLE. If the rule falls on the sixth point of the inverse scale, the shadow is double the height of its body, just as 12 is double 6. If on the fourth, which is the third part of 12, the height will be only the third part of the shadow. And thus one must judge other proportions.

[Geometric Quadrant Divisions]
This agrees with the ancient and common division of the geometric quadrant or altimeter scale into 12 equal parts in small astrolabes and quadrants, or into 60 or another multiple of 12 in larger and more spacious ones: which, in truth, seemed convenient and prompt, both because of the multitude of its aliquot parts, which are encountered quite often in practice and shorten a division, as when only 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, or 1/6 of a number is needed; and because of the ordinary division of our common measures, such as the toise into 6 feet, the foot into 12 inches, and the inch into 12 lines; so that after the analogy is made, the quotient is always known in these measures without new evaluation.

[Modern Astrolabe Scale Divisions]
But nevertheless, our small astrolabes are found to be divided differently in their quadrants or altimeter scales, namely into 10 or 100 equal parts, or another number, multiple of 10, according to the capacity of the instrument. And although this division, considering the reasons above, seems less prompt and easy than the preceding one: it is recognized in practice to be infinitely easier and more convenient, first, because of the two absolutely necessary operations in analogy, namely multiplication and division, it always saves one, in whatever way the said analogy is established; and therefore it gains almost half the time. Secondly, because the division by 10 is found to be easier to subdivide, to take fractions and smaller parts more precisely, and to subject them to a just calculation. Thirdly, because one can be helped in large subdivisions by tables and numbers of tangents or sines; by means of which one can have, with the number of parts of the scale, the number of degrees and minutes of the circle corresponding to it, and conversely, by the known height in degrees and minutes, estimate the parts of the scale more precisely.

[Example: Altimetric Observation]
As for example, let the alidade in some altimetric observation be found on...

[Shadow Scale Calculation Example]
the 45th degree of the umbra versa on the square of the astrolabe divided into 100 parts, or on the 45th degree, the division being only 10. And let the distance of some elevated body directly above the horizon be measured. If the said degree comes from the observation of its height, or else the length of the shadow, if the observation is made towards the sun, let the said distance or the said shadow be found to be 35 fathoms. Then, because as the entire side of the square is to the said parts of the umbra versa, so the length of the shadow or measured distance is to the height of the body: the analogy will thus be instituted as 100 is to 45, so 35 fathoms of shadow or distance will be to 15 and 3/4 fathoms of height. Now, in the operation of this analogy, it is seen that there is no need to perform any division, but only to truncate the last two figures of the number to be divided, to serve as the numerator in the fraction whose denominator is always the same number of 100, the divisor, and the number remaining after the said truncation is the number of whole fathoms. For multiplying 35 fathoms by 45 degrees of shadow makes 1575, which divided by 100, by truncating as many of the last figures as there are zeros in the divisor number 100, gives 15 whole fathoms, and the truncated figures placed above the line with the number 100 as the divisor below, give a fraction of 75/100; that is to say, 75 parts of a fathom which would be 100: or else by reduction to smaller terms, 3/4 of a fathom. Or if this observation was made with a square divided into 12 or 60 parts, the alidade would be found on the 27th degree of the umbra versa divided into 60, or on the 5 and 1/4 degree, so that in the operation it would be necessary not only to multiply 35 fathoms of shadow or measured distance by 27 or 5 and 1/4, but also to divide their product, namely 945 or 189, by 60 or by 12 to obtain 15 fathoms and 3/4 or 1/4, that is to say 3/4 of a fathom.

[Sun's Height and Tangent Tables]
And furthermore, if from the said observation one desires to know the height of the sun in degrees, or else the angle of the measured height: besides the sufficiently just and precise ratio found on our astrolabes of the degrees of the square or geometric scale with the degrees of the circle, we also have the same thing by the tables of tangents, taking only the first figures, and leaving as many of the last as the division of the square or scale of those tangents will be smaller. Thus, opposite 45, I find 24 degrees and about 14 minutes: and such was the height of the sun or the angle of the measured height. As, on the contrary, if in the observation one can estimate more precisely the degrees of the circle cut by the alidade than those of the square, the said tables will give us precisely the parts of the square or scale corresponding to the degrees of the circle. And by this means, a more accurate calculation and a more precise measurement will be made.

[Height Calculation Above 45 Degrees]
Regarding the Geometric Square. 297. PROPOSITION. To know the said heights when the sun is elevated more than 45 degrees. It is convenient to practice as we have said by the preceding Proposition, except that it must be understood that the heights of bodies exceed the length of the umbra recta, just as the shadow exceeded the bodies by the aforesaid proposition, when the rule touched the points of the umbra versa scale: and one must only consider the proportion of the points that the rule touches to 12.

[Umbra Recta Example]
EXAMPLE. If the rule falls on the sixth point of the umbra recta scale, this will demonstrate that the shadow of the body is half its height, because 6 is half of 12. And thus one must judge the others.

[Simplified Calculation for Umbra Recta]
In the operation and practice of this proposition on our small astrolabes, there is no need for a tedious multiplication, because as the parts of the umbra recta touched by the alidade are to the entire side of the square; so the shadows are to their bodies, or the distance to the heights: always assuming the bodies are perpendicular, and the planes on which the shadows and distances are measured are united and parallel to the horizon. Therefore, multiplying the entire side of the scale by the number of measures of the shadow or distance, and dividing the product by the number of parts touched by the alidade on the side of the umbra recta, the quotient, or fourth proportional term, will give the required height. Now, this multiplication, necessary in the division of the scale by 12 or 60, is saved in that by 10, 100, or 1000, there being only a need to add to the number to be multiplied 1, 2, 3, or as many ciphers and zeros as there are in the whole number of the division of the scale.

[Umbra Recta Calculation Example]
Regarding the Geometric Square. 299. EXAMPLE. Let it be that in the observation the alidade touches the 45th degree of the umbra recta and the shadow or the distance is measured at 35 fathoms. Therefore, one will say as 45 parts of umbra recta are to 100, the entire side of the square: so 35 fathoms of shadow or measured distance will be to 77 and 7/9 or 7/9 of a fathom of height. Now the multiplication of 35 by 100 is done by simply adding two ciphers, 3500, which divided by 45, give as quotient the said 77 and 7/9: and thus the operation is seen to be shortened by almost half.

[Finding Height by Visual Line]
300. Use and Utility of the Astrolabe. VIII. PROPOSITION. To find the height by the visual line. To find in general the height of an elevated body perpendicularly above the horizon by the visual line, it must be noted that when looking at the summit of a tower or other object, the rule will fall between the two scales, or on one of them. Therefore, if it happens that it falls between the two, the space will be equal to the height of the tower, by adding the distance from your eye to the ground, as demonstrated above. But if the said rule cut the umbra recta scale, the space with the height of the eye will be as much less than the size of the tower, as the points touched by the rule will be less than 12. On the contrary, if it touches the umbra versa scale, the said space will be, with the height of the eye, as much greater than the size of the tower, as 12 points will exceed the points of the said scale where the movable rule is found.

[Visual Line Height Example]
Regarding the Geometric Square. 301. EXAMPLE. If, by looking through the sights of the rule at the top and summit of a tower, the rule cuts the sixth point of the umbra recta, I will say that the space between my feet and the tower contains half the height that this tower has above my eye. Therefore, by measuring this distance, and taking it twice, you will have the universal height of that tower, by adding the distance from my eye to the ground. Similarly, one must judge the points of the umbra versa scale.

[Editor's Note on Text Correction]
Use and Utility of the Astrolabe. This passage needed to be re-established by Robert and others, but they passed over it without recognizing the defect, although the passage is one of the most important in this whole little treatise. Robert having made the first error here, he was followed by Jacquinot, as in many other places that we have noted in the treatise on the Astrolabe; in which appears the difference between what is given to us by proper and particular science, experience, and demonstration.

[Critique of Previous Altimetry Methods]
demonstration, and what we have simply reported by imitation of others. We say then that it is absurd, in the case where the rule cuts the straight scale, that the space, that is to say the distance with the height of the eye, is proportional to the height of the tower, just as the points of the scale touched by the said rule are to the whole number of the scale: in such a way that just as the said points are below 100, so also the said space with the height of the eye is as much less than the height of the tower: for the height of the eye can only in a case of mean shadow, or rather should never enter or be comprised in the proportion of the distance to the height; but it is a quantity always known, or supposed as such, which must be added to the quotient of the height found by analogy, to compose the entire height, which otherwise is only found above the point in the measured object corresponding to the height of the eye, or better, to the height of the center of the Astrolabe.

[Three Cases for Perpendicular Heights]
To re-establish therefore this proportion in suitable terms on our small Astrolabes: We say that to measure any perpendicular heights above the horizon, our visual ray (represented by the fiducial line of the alhidade) can be considered in three ways; Firstly, when the Alhidade meets the line of mean shadow, which Jacquinot calls between the two scales. Secondly, when it meets the scale on the side of the straight shadow. And thirdly on the scale or side of the versatile shadow. For the first case, it is true that the space with the height of the eye are equal to the entire height, and that the height of the eye in this case can be added to the distance, because the visual ray, being continued, will infallibly comprise on the ground a space from the point of the distance equal to the height of the eye, forming an isosceles right triangle: which would not happen in the two other following cases. For the second case, when the rule is found on the side of the straight shadow, the distance will be as much less than the height of the perpendicular body, such as a tower, pyramid, or other above the eye or the center of the Astrolabe, as the points touched by the rule are less than 100. For example, if the rule touches the 20th degree of straight shadow, the distance between the measurer, or the center of the Astrolabe and the proposed tower to be measured, will be only the fifth part of its height above the said center or eye of the measurer, as 20 degrees are only the fifth part of 100. Therefore, if the distance is measured as 6 fathoms, the height above the center of the Astrolabe will be 30 fathoms: to which adding the height of 5 feet or other measure, one will have the entire height of 30 fathoms 5 feet. But if in the observation the rule touched 10 degrees of versatile shadow, then the distance would be as much greater, that is to say five times greater than the said height, as 100 degrees or parts, the whole number

[Geometric Square: Versatile Shadow Calculation]
of the division of the scale, are five times more than the 10 degrees covered by the rule; and therefore at 5 fathoms distance, the height of a tower would be above the eye or center of the Astrolabe only 3 fathoms, and the entire height 3 fathoms 5 feet.

[Measuring Inaccessible Tower Height]
To find the height of a tower that cannot be approached.

[Method for Inaccessible Tower Height]
In such an occurrence, it is necessary to observe the summit of a tower one wishes to measure twice, by directing the rule each of the said times on the versatile scale and on some of its quotient points, such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then one must note the points at each time and their quotient numbers. After this, subtract the smaller from the larger, and the difference will remain, by which one must divide the space between the two places where such inspections were made; and the quotient number of this division with the height of the eye will show the height of the tower.

[Example: Inaccessible Tower Height]
Let us suppose that I see the top of a tower by the rule being at the sixth point of versatile shadow, and I mark the place where I saw the top of the said tower in such a situation of the rule. I retain the quotient number of the points that touch the rule, namely 2. This done, I place the rule on the fourth point, and move away from this tower in a straight line until I can see the top again in such a situation, noting likewise the place where this will happen, and also looking at the quotient of four points, which I find to be 3. Afterwards I subtract the first quotient, inasmuch as it is smaller, and 1 remains, by which dividing the space between the two marked places which I find to be 10 paces, to which I add the height of my eye which is 5 feet, and from the whole results 11 paces which is the height of that tower.

[Special Case: Quotient Difference of 1]
And it must be understood that whenever the difference of the quotient numbers is 1, then the distance between the two marks plus the height of the eye comprises the height of the tower, which happens when one of the sightings is made at the 5th point of the versatile scale, and the other at the 6th, or when one is made at the 6th and the other at the 4th. Also when one of the inspections is made at the 4th point, and the other at the 5th.

[Critique of Jacquinot's Altimetry]
As this proposition is the noblest, most general, and seemingly most difficult of all those in this altimetric treatise: so it seems to us that it was rather poorly understood by Jacquinot, or at least his discourse would give more to guess for the less skilled, than it would instruct them if it were not re-established, so obscure, confused, and ill-suited to the nature of the proposed matter it is. This is what moved the authors of the second impression to entirely cut out all of Jacquinot's discourse, and substitute another which they cobbled together from Stoeffler as best they could, to disguise their borrowing; and in truth, they disguised it so much that in the example they took from the said Stoeffler, they only propose to us one and the same observation encounter in two different places. But furthermore, David Robert himself, who by his third impression should have re-established and clarified the whole, was not content to follow and report the same impertinences: for besides this, by his annotations on this passage, composed of a jargon entirely boorish and ill-reasoned, it seems that he deliberately wanted to confuse the mind of the curious learner, to divert him from the path of intelligence, and prevent him from understanding it any more than he did. Such were previously the annotations and demonstrations of De Mesmes on Stoeffler in this place, who instead of supplying what was omitted by Stoeffler, got entangled himself in methods of practice and demonstrations that he did not understand, or else there was a great lack in all these books on the part of the Printers.

[Facilitating Geometric Square Understanding]
We will therefore consider, to further facilitate the understanding and practice of this proposition regarding the Geometric Square,

[Three Principal Cases for Measurement]
position to the least advanced, separately all the encounters that can be made in practice, according to how much more or less one can approach the proposed thing to measure, and we will reduce everything into three principal encounters: 1. If it happens that the two observations are made within a space or distance from the object that is less than its proposed height to be measured, the rule or alidade will be found in both observations stopped on the parts of the shadow direct. 2. If the two observations are made outside the distance of the object equal to its height, the rule in this case will always be found in both on the side of the shadow inverse. 3. If one of the two observations is made within the said distance, and the other outside, it will happen that the rule in this one will be found on the parts of the shadow inverse, and in the other on the parts of the shadow direct. As it can also happen that one of the observations is made at an equal distance to the height: Which happens when in the said observation, the rule is found stopped on the line of the mean shadow, in this case if the other observation falls on the shadow direct, they will both be considered on the shadow direct, and will follow the laws of the first encounter; but if the other falls on the shadow inverse, the two can be considered differently, either one on the shadow inverse, and the other on the shadow direct, and therefore under the laws of the 3rd encounter; or both on the shadow inverse and under the laws of the 2nd encounter.

[First Encounter & First Rule]
When the two observations are made within a distance less than the height to be measured, and therefore the rule in both falls on the side of the shadow direct, to obtain the exact height of the object, one will proceed in two principal, general, and easy ways. Let each number of parts cut by the rule in one and the other observation be divided by the entire side of the square, that is to say by the whole number of the division of the scale, and having taken the difference of the two quotients, by subtracting the smaller from the larger, let the measure found for the distance and space between the two observations be divided by that difference, and the quotient of this last division will be the exact height of the object above the center of the Astrolabe, which we will clarify more particularly with an example. EXAMPLE. Let a pyramid be proposed, not far off, yet separated by some wall, river, or ditch, or otherwise inaccessible, whose point is visible and remarkable, of which one wishes to know the height above some chosen plane to make the measurement. Having raised the Astrolabe or geometric square to some height, and turned the rule so that the measurer can, through the sights of the pinnules, see the point or summit of the said pyramid, one must note the number of parts that the rule covers on the side of the shadow direct: as well as the point on the plane corresponding to the center of the said square, and let this number be 5 of the shadow direct. Then, having moved back in a straight line to some distance on the same plane, let the Astrolabe or square be raised again to the same height as the first observation, and let the point of the said pyramid be observed by the measurer through the pinnules of the rule, noting again the number of parts cut by the said rule, which are found to be 9 of the shadow direct. This done, and having marked the place of this last observation, one must divide both the 5 of the first observation and the 9 of the second by the whole number 10 of the square to obtain 1/2 and 9/10 as quotients: whose difference is 4/10, by which one must divide the distance between the two observations: let it be measured as 20 fathoms; therefore, dividing 8 by 4/10, one will have 20 fathoms for the exact height of the said pyramid above the center of the Astrolabe or square.

[Second Method for First Encounter]
The second way to practice this first encounter will always be to take the difference of the two numbers of the parts of the shadow direct cut by the rule in the two observations, and say, as this difference is to the entire side of the square, so let the distance between the two observations be to another: The fourth proportional term will always be the exact height of the object to be measured above the center of the Astrolabe or square. As in the proposed example, the two numbers of shadow direct being 5 and 9, their difference is 4. Therefore, if one says as 4 parts of difference of shadow direct are to 10, the whole number of the scale, so let 20 fathoms of distance between the two observations be to the required height: the fourth proportional term being 20 fathoms, will be, as above, the exact height of the said pyramid above the center of the Astrolabe.

[Second Encounter & Second Rule]
When the two observations are each made at a distance further from the object to be measured than its height, and therefore the rule in both observations falls on the side of the shadow inverse. One will again proceed in these two ways. Let the whole number of the scale be divided by each number of the parts of the shadow inverse cut by the rule, and let the difference of the quotients proceeding from each division be taken, subtracting the smaller from the larger: and let the distance found between the two observations be divided by this difference: the quotient proceeding from this last division will be the exact required height.

[Example of Second Encounter]
EXAMPLE. Let for example be proposed the point of a bell tower, from the foot of which one cannot approach, and of which one wishes to know the height. And in the first observation of it, through the sights of the pinnules, the rule is found on 5 points of the shadow inverse: then moving back in a straight line, let the said point be observed again, and the rule found on 2 points of the same shadow. This done, and having measured the distance between the two observations as 15 fathoms, let the whole number 10 of the square or scale be divided by each of the said numbers 5 and 2 of the shadow inverse, and from the two quotients 2 and 5, let the difference 3 be taken; by which, having divided the measured distance between the two observations, namely 15 fathoms, one will have for quotient 5 fathoms, and that will be the exact height of the said point of the bell tower above the center of the Astrolabe.

[Converting Inverse to Direct Shadow]
The other way will be to convert the points of inverse shadow cut by the rule into points of direct shadow, and with these to do the same thing that we said in the second way for the first encounter; For this way differs in nothing from that one, except in the conversion and mutation of shadow where this one must begin. Now this conversion of points of inverse shadow into points of direct shadow is done in two ways: by one, dividing the square of the whole number of the scale by each of the points found of inverse shadow, the quotients will be points of direct shadow, which will have the same proportion to the entire side of the square, as the same entire side of the square to the points cut by the rule. Therefore, making it so that as each of the points of inverse shadow cut by the rule in one and the other observation is to the entire side of the square, that is to say, to the whole number of the scale: so let the same whole number be to another: one will have two third terms in continual proportion which will be points of direct shadow, with the difference of which one will proceed as stated above. By the other way, dividing the entire side of the square by the same points found of inverse shadow, then multiplying the quotients by the same entire side of the square, the products will be the same required points of direct shadow, whose difference will be proportional to the distance between the two observations, as the entire side of the square is to the proposed height to be measured, always to be taken above the center of the Astrolabe.

[Example: Steeple Height Calculation]
As in the example proposed above, concerning a steeple, in the two observations of which the rule was found at 5 and 2 points of umbra versa, making as 1 is to 10, so the same 10 to another: and as 5 is to 10, so the same 10 to another: That is to say, dividing 100, the square or product of the multiplication of 10 by itself, by 5 and by 2, one will have 20 and 50, which will be points of umbra recta in the same proportion to 10, the entire side of the square, as the same 10 to 5 and 2. These points will also be obtained by dividing 10 by 2 and by 5, and multiplying the quotients 5 and 2 by the same 10. Thus, taking 20 from 50 to find their difference 30, as the said 30 of difference of umbra recta are to 10, the whole number of the scale: so the 15 toises of distance between the two observations are to 5 toises of the exact height of the said steeple above the Astrolabe or square.

[Third Case and Rule]
When one of the observations is at a lesser distance than the height, and the other at a greater: And consequently, the rule cuts the scale of umbra recta in one, and the scale of umbra versa in the other. One will proceed in these two ways.

[Method for Third Case]
Let the number of parts of the umbra recta cut by the rule in the first observation be divided by the side or whole number of the square, and by the number of parts of the umbra versa cut in the second observation, let the said side or whole number of the square also be divided, and by the difference of the two quotients of the said divisions, let the number of measures found between the two observations be divided: for the new quotient resulting from this new division will be the exact height of the thing to be measured above the center of the Astrolabe.

[Example: Castle Wall Height]
Let it be proposed to measure and know how high and elevated a walled Castle is above the plain or countryside that surrounds it. The Astrolabe being elevated to its ordinary height (for we suppose that one has a suitable staff of a known length, to which the Astrolabe is attached to always know its height, and this for more security and promptness, although it is not absolutely necessary) (seeing through the pinhole sights the top of the wall of the said Castle, the rule cuts 9 parts of the umbra recta: then having marked the place, and moved back in a straight line, seeing again the same point of the top of the wall, the rule cuts 8 parts of the umbra versa: after having measured the space between the two observations, found perhaps to be 5 toises, if one divides 9 parts of umbra recta by 10, the whole side of the square, one will have 9/10 as quotient: and dividing the said whole side 10 by 8 of umbra versa, one will have 10/8: then subtracting one from the other, namely 9/10 from 10/8, one will have 14/40 as difference, by which if one divides 5, the number of toises found between the two observations, one will have 14 toises and 2/7 of a toise for the exact height of the said wall above the Astrolabe. If the Astrolabe is elevated by 5 feet, one will have for the entire height or elevation of the said wall above the plain 15 toises 8 inches and very nearly 7 lines.

[Second Method for Castle Height]
This same measurement will also be found by this second method, which will be to convert only the points of the umbra versa cut by the rule in the second observation into points of umbra recta, and by the difference of these to those of the first observation, divide the product of the multiplication of the measured distance by the whole side of the square: for the quotient will be the same as above for the required height. As in the proposed example, the 8 points of umbra versa of the second observation being converted into 12 and 1/2 of umbra recta (which is done either by dividing 100, the square of the whole number of the scale, by 8 parts of umbra versa, or by dividing 10, the whole side of the square, by the said 8, and multiplying the product 1 and 1/4 by the same 10.) As 3 and 1/2 of difference between 9 and 12 and 1/2 points of umbra recta are to the 10 points of the whole scale: so the 5 toises of measured distance between the two observations will be to the same 14 toises and 2/7 of desired height for the elevation of the said wall above the Astrolabe.

[Generalizing Measurement Techniques]
These three kinds of principal cases in the practice of this 4th proportion being well examined and understood, it will be easy to reduce all others to them, as if in one observation the rule is found on the line of the mean shadow, and in the other on the umbra recta, these two will be considered as umbra recta by which, dividing the whole side of the square, and by the difference of their quotients the space between the observations, one will have for a new quotient the required height; and this by the first method. And by the second, as their difference will be to the whole side of the square. Thus the space between the observations will be the desired height. But if in the first observation the rule falls on the line of the mean shadow, and in the second on the umbra versa, the two observations will be considered either as in the 1st or as in the 3rd case, by dividing the two points touched by the rule by the whole side of the square, or by dividing only the points of umbra versa for the first method; and for the second, it will only be necessary to convert the points of umbra versa of the second observation into points of umbra recta, and do the rest as in the said 1st or 3rd cases.

[Two Ways to Use the Square]
There are two ways to use, in all this treatise on the Geometric Square described on the Astrolabe. One by which the measurer subjects the said Astrolabe to his convenience, and the other by which he subjects himself to his Astrolabe. By the first, the measurer makes the Astrolabe mobile, both for its situation and for the change and variation of its rule: by the other, the measurer having set the rule of his Astrolabe on some point of the square, he subjects himself to moving back or forward, raising or lowering until his eye meets and aligns with the fiducial line of the rule to be able to make his observation. And as the first method is more general and prompt for experts in these exercises, so the second is easier and more suitable for those who are less experienced, as it is derived and drawn from the clear knowledge and long experience of the first to accommodate the capacity of those curious to learn. Now Jacquinot confuses these two methods throughout this proposition: for at the beginning he seems to subject the Astrolabe, by saying that one must observe on which points of umbra versa the rule falls in the two observations; and then here in the example he supposes the rule to have been set and fixed on the 6, then on the 4 points of umbra versa, and that the measurer, by moving back or forward, had to search for the place to be able to observe in such a configuration of the rule to obtain a distance between his two observations equal to the height to be measured above his eye. Nevertheless, he seems to attach himself more particularly to the latter method, and gives at the end the means to be able to practice it, determining some points on which, the observations being made, one can have between them a distance equal to the height to be measured. But since according to the first method of practice, which we have clarified above concerning the cases of this proposition, there is always a similar proportion.

[Measuring Heights with Astrolabe Quotients]
portion of the difference of the quotients to Unity, as of the distance between the observations to the height to be measured above the center of the Astrolabe or square: We say that it is just as easy to give a distance double, triple, quadruple, etc., or half, or in another proportion to the height, as equal, by noting on the square the points whose difference of their quotient is 1, 5, 4, etc., or 4, 7, and others. As on our division by 10 in our small Astrolabes, if one observation is made on 1 point of umbra versa, and the other on 2, the distance will be five times greater than the height. One being on 4 and the other on 5 of the same umbra versa, the distance will be half. One on 1 and the other on 5, the distance will be triple: on 1 and on 5, the distance would be 5 times greater than the height to be measured, always taken above the center of the square.

[Notes for Less Experienced Practitioners]
NOTE. As we are not working here for experts more advanced in these exercises, but for the less experienced, and who need the path to be made easier for them, who need to be guided as by the hand to turn them away from bad passages, and to make them aware of what they should fear and avoid. Thus we deem it necessary to reveal to them here the difficulties that might stop them, and to make them aware of the precautions they should take in the practice of this proposition. For the difficulties concerning the Geometric Square, we advise them to first exercise themselves in the 4 parts of Arithmetic, both in whole and broken numbers, in order to know how to reduce to the same denomination, add, subtract, multiply, and divide all sorts of fractions that are often encountered in the practice of this proposition. Otherwise, it would be to give oneself a lot of trouble in vain, or at least for little profit. For the precautions (besides those we have noted above concerning the balance of the Astrolabe, the equality of the chosen plane for observation, and the same height or elevation of the Astrolabe, by means of the same proper and chosen staff for this effect), it is still necessary, to operate more justly, to note very precisely the places of the two observations in order to measure and have the distance more justly: which will be done easily enough with a plumb bob (stone, or other thing found as needed) hung on a string, which falling freely to the ground, when the string touches the center of the Astrolabe or the square, will give on the ground the true places of the observations. And to measure a proposed height more justly, care will be taken after the first observation to move back or forward to make the second, so that the two observations correspond in a straight line with the line that must be imagined to fall from the point noted at the summit of the proposed height on the same plane on which the measurer makes his observations: that is to say, in a word, that the two observations are made in the same plane perpendicular to the horizon, and passing through the same point noted at the summit of the thing to be measured in both observations. This will happen when, after having made the first observation, and having marked its place, one will stick a rod or staff there, from which one will move away by receding so that, from the place where one wants to make the second observation, seeing and looking at the same point noted in the proposed height, the said rod or staff marks and recognizes it precisely between the two. And this manner of receding will be more secure for the less experienced than advancing: which practice will make known enough.

[Distance of Inaccessible Heights]
ADDITION. Concerning the distance of the same inaccessible heights. It will perhaps not be found out of place to add here that there is a way in the practice of this 9th proposition to derive from the aforesaid two observations the distances of the same measured heights; and this by the second methods that we have reported on all encounters, by reduction as needed of umbra versa to umbra recta: to make known how useful and general the said method is. Concerning the Geometric Square, suppose then that one has made the two observations above to know some proposed height, and that by the second method, reducing everything to umbra recta, one has found the just measure of the said height, if one desires to know the distance between the first or last station and the thing to be measured: Generally, what proportion there will be of the difference of the two umbra recta to the smaller, or to the larger: such will always be that of the distance between the two observations to the distance from the closest or from the furthest of them. Therefore, whenever by two observations one desires to know the distance of some inaccessible thing, one must first always reduce, if necessary, the points of umbra versa of one or the other, or of both observations, if it so happens, to points of umbra recta: then having taken their difference; as this difference will be to the smaller umbra recta, or to the larger: so the distance measured between the two stations will be to the distance between the closest, or the furthest of them, and the proposed thing.

[Example: Castle Wall Measurement]
EXAMPLE. We will use here the example reported by us in the third encounter on the subject of the wall of a Castle surrounded by moats, where at the first observation the rule cut 5 parts of umbra recta, and at the second 8 parts of umbra versa. If then one asks how far each station, or each place of the two observations, is from the said wall: Having reduced the said 8 parts of umbra versa to 12 and 1/2 of umbra recta, and taken the difference of the said two numbers 9 and 12 and 1/2, namely 3 and 1/2, as the said 3 and 1/2 of difference are to 9 parts of umbra recta of the first and closest observation, or to 12 and 1/2 of the second and furthest, so the distance measured between the two observations of 5 toises, will be to the distance of the closest 11 toises and 1/2 of a toise, or to that of the second and furthest 17 toises and 1/2. But inasmuch as the distance of the second observation can be obtained by adding to that of the first the distance between the two observations, it will suffice to find by analogy that of the said first or closest, which will always be by multiplying the distance measured between the two observations by the points of the first, and dividing the product by the difference of the points of the one and the other.

[Inaccessible Heights from a Single Station]
ANOTHER ADDITION. Concerning the distances and heights of inaccessible things, whose base is not remarkable, and this by a single station. David Robert having in his Annotations on this 5th proposition made this question.

[Measuring Inaccessible Heights with One Station]
If, due to some inconvenience of the location or otherwise, one cannot make two observations in two different places, one might ask if there is a way to measure a proposed height that cannot be approached. It has been well answered that yes, but he has not given us much clarification, although, departing from all previous propositions, he has again called upon the following for his aid and succor. If he had done this, or if he had not formed the question, he would have relieved us of this trouble; for as it has not been our intention to report and pursue in this treatise all the methods that can be invented in the practice and handling of the geometric quadrant, of which we would, if necessary, swell a large volume; so our principal aim has been to clarify everything in this treatise that might cause difficulty or curiosity for the less advanced. So, Robert having formed the aforesaid question, we deem it appropriate to clarify it for anyone who might be curious to know its solution; which we will also give concerning distances, even in cases where the base of the object, such as a tower, wall, or other perpendicular body, is neither visible nor remarkable.

[Measuring Inaccessible Perpendicular Bodies]
We therefore say that there is a way with the Astrolabe or simple geometric quadrant, from a single place, to measure and know both the height of any inaccessible perpendicular body and its distance, even if its base is not remarkable. To achieve this more easily, the surveyor, if not yet very expert (for otherwise the thing is not absolutely necessary), should only provide himself with a stick of a certain length, to attach his Astrolabe or geometric quadrant in such a way that at two places on the said stick, the said Astrolabe or quadrant can be attached, sometimes higher, sometimes lower.

[Method for Two Observations]
Suppose then that on the said stick, the Astrolabe or quadrant can be raised to a height of 6 feet, and to another of 2 feet. The said stick being fixed in the ground, and the Astrolabe being elevated thereon by 6 feet, some remarkable point at the summit of the proposed object to be measured will be observed as before; and it will be marked on which points of the direct or inverse shadow the rule is stopped. Then, lowering the Astrolabe to a height of 2 feet, to have 4 feet of distance or difference between the two observations, the same point will again be observed through the pinnules, and it will be noted on which other points of the direct or inverse shadow the rule is found. This will always hold true, if necessary, to convert the points of direct shadow into points of inverse shadow (and this in the same manner as we have shown above, the conversion of inverse shadows into direct shadows being one and the same thing, but which must here be taken in reverse); then, by their difference, the product of the multiplication of the space between the two observations by the largest number of the inverse shadow will be divided, that is to say, by that of the lower observation; for the quotient of this division will be the exact height of the proposed object to be measured, to be taken above the lower observation.

[Example: Measuring a Gable and Wall]
For example, a house gable is presented, and a wall between the two; and one wishes to know the height of the said gable. The Astrolabe being elevated to 6 feet in height (by means of the aforesaid stick or other perpendicular stake on the plane of the horizon), if, by looking through the pinnules at the top of the said gable, the rule falls on 8 points of inverse shadow; and having lowered the Astrolabe to a height of 2 feet, if, by a second observation of the said gable, the rule falls on 8 points of the same shadow; as their difference, namely 4, is to 8 points of inverse shadow touched in the second, and lower observation: thus the 4 feet of difference in Astrolabe height between the two observations will be 34 feet above the center of the Astrolabe in the said second observation: which being in the said observation elevated by 2 feet, as said, one will have 36 feet or 6 fathoms for the entire height of the said gable above the plane on which the said observations were made.

[Calculating Distance with Inverse Shadows]
But to know the distance, one will practice the two methods that we have reported above for knowing heights by two stations, having no other difference except that here we will apply to inverse shadows what we said there about direct shadows, and to direct shadows what was said there about inverse shadows; and for the distance between the two stations, we will here consider the difference in the height of the Astrolabe in the two observations. Furthermore, the same rules will be practiced without changing anything, and in any encounters according to the different positions of its rule and observations, which encounters can also all be reduced to three main ones.

[Example: Distance to a Gable]
As in the proposed example of a house gable, whose base, due to a wall between the two, cannot be discovered or noticed: Since in the first observation of the top of the said gable, the rule was found on 8 points of inverse shadow, and in the second, 4 feet lower, on 8 and a half of the same shadow; By the first method, dividing the entire side of the square, namely the number 10, by each of the points of inverse shadow 8 and 8 and a half, one will have two quotients 10/8 and 10/8.5, whose difference is 1/17; by which dividing the 4 feet of difference between the two heights of the Astrolabe in the two observations, one will have 80 feet, or 13 fathoms 2 feet of distance or remoteness to the base of the said gable. And by the second method, the 8 and 8 and a half points of the two observations being on the inverse shadow, only their difference will be taken, namely 1/2. And as the said difference will be to the entire side of the square 10: thus the 4 feet of difference in the height of the Astrolabe will be to the said 80 feet, or 13 fathoms 2 feet of remoteness as above; that is to say, multiplying the 4 feet of difference in the height of the Astrolabe by the 10 of the entire scale, and dividing the product 40 by 1/2, the difference between the points of inverse shadow, one will have a quotient or fourth proportional term of 80 feet, which will be the exact remoteness of the base of the said gable.

[Height of a Tower on a Mountain]
X. PROPOSITION To know the height of a tower situated on a mountain. If you wish to know the height of a tower or other object situated on a mountain, place yourself on a flat spot near it, then, according to the doctrine previously given for two stations, take the height of the tower and the mountain together: then the height of the mountain separately, which, subtracted from the first height, will leave that of the tower.

[Example: Measuring a Tower on a Mountain]
EXAMPLE. Wishing to measure a tower situated on a mountain, I first look at the height of this tower, as if it were on flat ground, which I find to be 100 paces. And because the mountain gives it an advantage, I observe its height separately, which I find to be 50 paces, which I subtract from the total height I previously found, and 50 paces remain, which is the particular height of this tower. By this means, you can measure the length of a window or the advantage of a house roof, and other similar things.

[Understanding Mountain and Tower Heights]
This 10th proposition should be understood as follows: if from some place on a plain, one discovers a tower, building, or other structure built on a mountain that is elevated above the same plain, with their base situated on the summit or another part of the said mountain: one might wish to know both the height of the said tower alone above the mountain, or of the mountain alone below the tower, as well as the height of both together.

[Measuring Tower Height on a Mountain]
above the plain. Otherwise, in the way Jacquinot proposed it to us, without determining or assuming anything, difficulties may arise. It is indeed true that the height of the court, for example, with the mountain above the plain, can be known by taking it along a line, which from the visible and remarkable point at the summit of the said court would fall perpendicularly onto the said plain; but to take the height from the summit of the mountain above the same plain would be of no use for obtaining the said height of the tower alone, if the foot or base of the said tower were not remarkable, and not sufficiently recognizable on the said summit of the mountain; and therefore it is more appropriate to say, to obtain the height of the tower alone, that after having measured the height of its summit above the plain, one must measure the height of its base above the same plain, in order to conclude the height of the tower alone from the difference of the two heights. Now, the method of practicing this proposition is no different from the preceding one, namely, according to Jacquinot, by two different stations, which we have shown can be done by a single one, of which we will repeat nothing here, inasmuch as this proposition is but an application of the precepts of the preceding one. We will only warn that although it is proposed here to know two heights in one, it is nevertheless not necessary, but rather useless, to do it according to Jacquinot, and thus as his figure shows in the Geometric Square. 355 represents it, four different stations, namely two for each of the said heights: it is enough to make only two for both, observing in each of the said stations the two points whose height one desires to know, always the same distance between the two stations will be proportional to each height above the Astrolabe, as the difference of the points of direct shadow converted or cut by the rule in the observation of each of the said points, is to the side or whole number of the square. We will also note on Jacquinot's figure something that the less advanced should be wary of, which is the inequality of the height of the Astrolabe, or of the observer's eye, figured in the four different stations. For absolutely in all this treatise, whether receding or advancing, whether rising or lowering, to make the observations, it must always be in straight lines, one parallel to the horizon, and the other perpendicular, otherwise there would be some disproportion in the distances between the stations to the required heights. For the distances, both of the said tower and of the mountain on which it is seated and elevated, we can still practice what we have said about the preceding proposition, either by two stations or by a single one. And supposing that the said tower is built precisely on the summit of the mountain, being able by means of a visible point at its top to know its distance, we will consequently have 334 The Use and Utility of the Astrolabe. that of the summit of the mountain, which distance of both should be taken, as said, from the point on the plain on which a perpendicular line would fall from the point marked at the top or extremity of the said tower; XL. PROPOSITION. To measure the length of a field, or other plains. One must consider that by the simple height of your eye you cannot justly measure any plains that are longer than the height of your eye, wherefore for longer measurements it would be necessary to be in an elevated window, or in another high place, by the known heights of which you will measure those fields. And to do this, you must hang the Astrolabe and direct the rule until you can see the extremity of the length you wish to measure, then you will find the rule on one or the other scale, or between the two. Firstly, if it falls on the direct scale, such proportion as 12 will have to the points of that scale that the said rule will touch, such proportion will have Concerning the Geometric Square. 355 will the height of your eye have to the distance: as if it falls on the sixth point of the said scale, the distance seen will be only half the height of your eye. But on the contrary, if the rule falls on the inverse scale at the same point, that distance will be twice as long as the height of your eye. And thus you can judge the other points: as if the rule fell on the 12th point of the inverse scale, the height of the eye would be only the 6th part of the distance, just as 1 is only the 6th part of 12. 336 The Use and Utility of the Astrolabe. This 11th proposition is proper and particular for measuring distances: whose extremity is visible and remarkable, and is, as it were, the converse of the 8th preceding one, in which, by a known distance or length, inasmuch as one can freely approach the foot of the thing to be measured, it is taught how to find its height. For here, by a known height, it is proposed to measure and know a distance or length. It is therefore necessary here to note that just as this proposition is only a simple conversion of the proportions of the said 8th, namely from the given to the required, from the known to the unknown, and from one ratio to the other: so all the encounters in this proposition must be similar to those of the said 8th. But in the aforesaid 8th proposition, the thing to be measured being supposed perpendicular to the horizon, and the distance parallel (by the continuation of the horizontal line of the Astrolabe up to the thing to be measured, on which line the said distance is measured) therefore in this proposition it is necessary to suppose and take care that the known height (which is the staff of which Jacquinot speaks) is perpendicular to the horizon, and that the distance to be measured is parallel, so that one is perpendicular to the other to relate to the small triangle that is formed in the observation on the Geometric Square of the Astrolabe. Otherwise, if there is some dissimilarity, and therefore disproportion, one would consequently have a false measurement. Now we have Concerning the Geometric Square. 337 noted this, inasmuch as it rarely happens that one can find a plain as even and parallel to the horizon as most of the heights proposed to be measured are straight and perpendicular: Or rather, inasmuch as it will happen even less often that any distance proposed to be measured is found to be such as to be able to obtain a just measurement by this proposition. What is stated above, nevertheless, being supposed possible: we say that Jacquinot, Stoeffler, and others too much restrict and confine the help and utility that can be drawn from the Astrolabe for the practice of this proposition concerning planimetry, saying that it is not possible with it to measure a length longer than 12 times the height of the eye of the measurer, or of his staff, that is to say, of the Astrolabe, if it is attached to the said staff, which would always be more secure than holding it in the hand to sight over the said staff as Jacquinot's figure represents. It is indeed true that in distances further than the height of the Astrolabe, the rule always cutting the side of the inverse shadow, and therefore the parts of the said shadow cut by the rule being proportional to the whole side of the square, as the height of the Astrolabe to the proposed distance: if one simply considers the number of the division of the square into 10, 12, or another number of parts, and that the rule cannot rise on the scale of the inverse shadow, diminish the number of cut parts only to unity, the smallest proportion will be of the height 358 The Use and Utility of the Astrolabe.

[Geometric Square Scale Divisions]
of the Astrolabe at the proposed distance, like from the unit to the side or whole number of the scale; thus, the side or whole number of the scale being 10 or 11, 60 or 100 equal parts, one could only measure a distance 10 or 11, 60 or 100 times longer than the said height of the Astrolabe. But as in physical things and continuous quantities (such are the degrees, points, or divisions of the Altimetric scale), the unit is not considered mathematically as a mathematical point, and therefore indivisible, but physically as an infinitely subdivisible quantity, which is therefore like a proportional mean between each of its parts up to an infinite division, and each of its corresponding multiples up to an infinite multiplication: Thus, our altimetric divisions, whether of 10 or 11, 60 or 100, both each of them and the first represented and named as the unit, are always understood to be divisible, at least into certain common and easily distinguishable and recognizable aliquot parts, such as 1, 2, 4, or others. This, which is actually done in large instruments that can be divided into 100, 1000, or another number of parts, must be understood in small instruments, such as in one of ours, in which each 10th degree can and must be estimated as subdivisible at least into 2, 3, 4, 5, or 10 other parts, according to what can be judged from observation to estimate more justly the

[Regarding the Geometric Square]
segments made by the rule on each of the said whole parts. Therefore, we conclude that with a simple division of 10, for example, as in our small Astrolabe, there will be a way to measure a length greater than 10 times the height of the Astrolabe, according to how, by a subdivision of each degree by 2, 3, or 4, the entire scale of the Geometric Square will be understood to be divided into 10, 30, or 40 equal parts, to be used as needed in case of a distance 20, 30, or 40 times greater than the said height of the Astrolabe.

[Example of Geometric Square Measurement]
EXAMPLE. For example, a length to be measured on a plain is proposed, the extremity of which is remarkable; if, observing the said extremity, the rule is found stopped on one quarter of the first division of the umbra versa, we will say that as 2.5 is to 10 (the whole number of the scale), so 5 feet of Astrolabe height will be to 100 feet or 33 toises 2 feet of the proposed length.

[Measuring Inaccessible Distances and Heights]
ADDITION. Regarding the distances and heights of inaccessible things, whose base is visible, and this by a single station. We will add this remark here: That, since by the 8th proposition, by means of a known distance or length, one knows a height, and by this, with a known height, one knows a length, there is a way with these two propositions, from a single station and the same height of Astrolabe or Geometric Square, to measure and know a proposed distance with a height that would be perpendicular to it, which one could not approach; provided, however, that the extremity of the said length or distance, or else the foot and base of the said height, be visible and remarkable. For the Astrolabe being hung on a stick, and elevated to a certain height, if observing through the pinnules the foot of a tower, for example, one can by the present proposition measure and know the distance of its foot, in the same proportion to the height of the Astrolabe, as the parts of the umbra recta to the whole side of the square, or the same whole side of the square to the parts of the umbra versa: One can then, afterwards, by the said 8th proposition, observing the summit of the said tower without varying anything, except the rule, know its height which will always be proportional to the said first found distance, as the parts of the umbra versa to the whole side of the square, or the same whole side of the square to the parts of the umbra recta.

[Example: Measuring a Tower's Height and River Width]
EXAMPLE. Let a tower be proposed, for example, which one cannot approach due to a river; the base, however, is uncovered, and one wishes to know the width of the said river that flows at the foot of the tower, together with the height of the said tower. The stick for hanging the Astrolabe being fixed at the edge of the river, in a place corresponding to the height of the foot of the said tower, and the Astrolabe attached at a height of 5 feet, let the foot of the said tower be observed through the pinnules and marked on what point of the scale the rule meets, and let the points found be 2.5 of umbra versa; then raising the rule, the rest remaining immobile, let the summit of the said tower be observed, and the rule found in this second observation on the 6th point, also of umbra versa. This being done, we will say that as 2.5 points of umbra versa in the first observation are to 10 (the whole number of the scale), so 5 feet of Astrolabe height will be to 35 feet 7 inches of river width, or of distance between the place of observation and the foot of the said tower. Then we will say again, as 10 (the whole number of the scale) is to 6 points of umbra versa of the second observation, so the 35 feet 7 inches found distance will be to 21 feet 4 inches of the height of the said tower.

[Measuring Depths of Wells and Cisterns]
XII AND LAST proposition. To measure wells, pits, cisterns, and other depressed places, of which one can see the bottom, and whose width is known. Just as we measure unknown heights by known distances: Similarly, we measure depths by the knowledge of their widths. To find therefore the depth of a well, one must look through the rule, directing the sight from the nearest part of the well's edge to the opposite and most distant part of the water. And then if the rule falls on the 10th point of one or the other of these scales, the width will be equal to the depth: but if it falls on the umbra recta scale, the said depth will be greater than the width, by as much as the points touched by that rule will be less than 10. On the contrary, when it falls on the points of the umbra versa

[Depth Measurement with Geometric Square]
the depth is smaller than the width according to the proportion of these points to 12. EXAMPLE. Wanting to measure the depth of a well, let it be A. B. C. D. by looking through the two opposite points of the top and bottom, like A. D. I find the rule of the back cutting the 10th point between the umbra recta and umbra versa scale. By this I know the depth of this well to be equal to its width, but if it fell on the 6th point of the umbra recta scale, then the width would be half of its depth, so that if the width of the said well is found to be 6 feet, I say the well is 12 feet deep. Similarly, if the rule touched on the first point of this scale, which is the 12th part of its width, then the diameter or width of the well will be the 12th part of the depth, which according to the given example will contain 72 feet, and thus one must judge the other proportions according to the points touched by the rule.

[Observing Depths with the Astrolabe]
This must be understood by observing with the Astrolabe, that is to say, that the measurer, making his observation, must hold his Astrolabe in hand or otherwise freely suspended in such a way that by raising or lowering the rule, he can, directing his sight through the holes of the pinnules, see both the nearest inner edge of the well and the extremity of the water's edge on the opposite part of the bottom. Thus, the eye of the measurer, the two holes of the pinnules, the two opposite points on the upper edge, and at the extremity of the water, must be in one and the same line: otherwise the observation will not be accurate, nor the measurement found precise.

[Measuring Depths: A Necessary Precaution]
But here it is still necessary to note a necessary precaution in the practice of this proposition, which, as Jacquinot says, teaches by the knowledge of widths to measure depths, just as by the preceding propositions, by means of some known distances or widths, heights have been measured. For just as in the preceding propositions it was always presupposed that the heights proposed to be measured were erected perpendicularly, both to the horizon and to the planes on which the observations were made and the measurements taken; so also in this one it must still be supposed that the things whose depth is proposed to be measured are perpendicular, both to the horizon and to the planes on which the widths that we suppose to be known are taken and measured: and this all the more so as few things of this quality are encountered. For although ordinarily the widths we wish to use, or rather the planes where we take them, are parallel to the horizon, such as the edges and copings of wells and cisterns, nevertheless the depth is not willingly found to be plumb due to the slope, the force of the foot, or the necessary counter-slope to strengthen the walls against the force and weight of the earth they support. Thus, a well will always be found to be wider at the top than at the bottom; and thus a ditch will always be narrower at the bottom than at the top. This being verifiable and noted, it is easy to judge that for want of having foreseen it, there would infallibly be more or less error in the measurement according to the greater or lesser difference in the said widths.

[Practical Application for Depth Measurement]
Therefore, to practice this proposition more surely: we will advise the apprentice to begin by recognizing the difference in widths if there is any between the bottom and the top of the proposed object. This will be done as follows: the balance of his Astrolabe being adjusted, he will precisely stop the rule on the meridian or perpendicular line of the back, and his said Astrolabe hanging freely, he will advance in such a way that through the holes of the pinnules he can see the foot of the wall, and will mark the place where he made this observation. And from the same place he will observe the opposite extremity of the bottom: and by the proportion of the points of the scale touched by the rule, to the shadow of the entire scale, or conversely (according to whether the depth is greater or lesser than the width), he will judge that which the width (diminished by double what he will have advanced, that is to say, reduced and made equal to the bottom width) will have to the depth: and he will surely practice all that is taught here by Jacquinot, without however stopping at his figure, which is little conformable to the nature of the thing proposed to be represented, and which represents to us more naturally the method of measuring the distance of some elevated mirror, than the depth of a well or cistern: in that both the surface of the water and the enclosure of the walls, figured like the glass of a mirror furnished with its frame, are represented to us perpendicularly on the plane of the horizon, as well as the measurer. And it seems that the measurer only wishes to know how far he is from the marked extremity D. Which, according to the proportion of the small triangle marked on the Astrolabe, would be as distant as the height of the measurer's eye: to which, however, the same appearance resists. In this appears the difference between the painter or other who simply imitates and follows his fantasies and imaginations to express them according to his capacity, or him who, considering the said fantasies and imaginations in nature, imitates nature by expressing them: which we call representing things naturally. This is why, instead of Jacquinot's aforesaid figure, we advise the apprentice to consider the one we have placed below at the end of the following addition.

[Addition: Measuring Depths Without Known Widths]
We will add here, as a final point to this last proposition, what we have given in the preceding years, that just as it does not always happen that the proposed objects, whose bottom is visible, can be measured in width to find their depth from there, so also there is a way in the said case to measure the said depth just as easily as by the preceding propositions we have made the heights without having known the distances: and this method should be all the more esteemed as it is general for knowing both the widths, however unequal from bottom to top, and the depths, and this by two observations, and nevertheless from a single station.

[Measuring Wells, Cisterns, and Ditches]
Therefore, a well, cistern, or ditch being proposed, of which one desires to know both the depth and the width. Let the Astrolabe be elevated on the coping of the well, the edge of the cistern, or the parapet of the ditch in such a way, as we have said before with a suitable stick chosen for this effect, that at two different heights the opposite edge of the water in the well or cistern, or the foot of the wall opposite the bottom of the ditch, can be perceived through the pinnules. For what proportion will the difference in the number of points of direct or inverse shadow touched by the rule in the two observations have to the smaller number, such will be the difference in the height of the Astrolabe in the said two observations to the depth below the center of the Astrolabe in the lowest of them. And therefore, by subtracting the elevation of the center of the Astrolabe in the lowest observation above the said coping or parapet, one will have the exact depth of the well below the coping, or of the ditch below its parapet. As also, what proportion will the difference in height of the Astrolabe in the two observations always have to the proposed width (to be taken between the center of the Astrolabe and the point at the same height, corresponding above to that which will have been observed below), that the difference in the direct shadows laid down or reduced will be found to have to the whole number of the scale.

[Combined Measurement Techniques]
So, adding to this what we have said above for the measurement of height by a single station, it will be easy to measure and know both the depth of a ditch and the height and distance of the wall of some castle or fortress, and this from a single and same station; but by four observations made at two different heights or situations of the Astrolabe or Geometric Square. We will content ourselves with having only noted and somewhat represented this by one of the figures we have added above.

[Use of the Universal Geometric Trellis]
The small squares, divided and distinguished by tens and hundreds, which we have had placed on the back of our small Astrolabes, is what we call the geometric Trellis, or universal Geometric Square. Its use is powerful, and as much, indeed more ample than that of the geometric Square, or common altimeter scale; but much quicker and easier, and can be adapted to all sorts of divisions, both ordinary such as of 11, 60, 144, and other multiples of 11: or of 10, 100, 1000, and other multiples of 10: as well as non-ordinary such as of 8, 16, 15, 30, and others at will. And moreover, it needs no knowledge of Arithmetic, except for simple numeration: because most of the propositions of Jacquinot's geometric treatise (I mean all those that can be practiced by a single observation) are practiced.

[Universal Geometric Grid Use]
on this Grid without any indication of analogy or rule of three: that is to say, without needing to perform any multiplication or division, one can immediately obtain what is required. And for propositions involving two observations, this small Grid has the additional advantage of facilitating the necessary analogies encountered therein, and this by exhibiting the unknown term without any multiplication or division, as will be more particularly noted hereafter in its place. Furthermore, it does not depend in any way on the geometric square, but can serve alone: provided only (I mean if any Grid were made alone and separate from the Astrolabe) that it is positioned in such a way, during observation, that one of its sides is perpendicular to the horizon, and the other parallel, as is seen on the back of our Astrolabes, where one of these sides is seated and corresponds to the straight horizon, and the other is perpendicular to it, corresponding with the perpendicular line of the Astrolabe. And the angle where the said two sides join and terminate corresponds precisely to the center of the Astrolabe: in a word, it has on the back of the Astrolabe such and similar a situation as one of the geometric squares described below. This is not to say that one cannot use the said Grid in the form that one sometimes uses the geometric square with a plumb bob suspended from a thread, the pinnules being attached to one of the sides of the said square or grid. We have said that the use of the said Grid can be accommodated to all sorts of divisions of squares or geometric scales. This is all the more true because the said Grid can alone represent an infinity of diverse geometric squares differently divided: which is justified by its very construction, inasmuch as all the spaces are square and equal, and two lines equally distant from the center also comprise a square space, whose sides are all divided by the lines of the interior squares in such a number as is the order of their distance from the said center, as the two fifteenths form a square divided into 15 equal parts, the two twentieths form one divided into 20, and the two thirtieths one divided into 30, and so on for others, according to any other number of squares comprised. And therefore it is true to say that the use of this Grid is more ample and more general than that of any other common geometric square, far from the distinction of straight or inverse shadow being considerable in the operation for the measurement of any height, length, or depth; inasmuch as on the said Grid one can always consider a small similar triangle, and similarly positioned to the large triangle whose sides are proposed to be measured. We will therefore come to the practice and more particular explanation of its use, which for more clarification we will apply to Jacquinot's propositions on the use of the Square.

[Finding Height by Sun's Shadow]
To find the height of a tower, or other thing, by the sun's shadow. If we fix the Alidade on the 45th degree of the circle on the side of the said Grid, that is to say, on the midpoint of the quadrant of the said circle where the said Grid is figured, we will see that the fiducial line of the said Alidade will precisely cut all the large and small squares of the said Grid through their angles, and will divide each into two equal right-angled and isosceles triangles. Now the Alidade, or its fiducial line, always representing the ray or solar, or visual, being the diagonal of the said squares or triangles, one of the sides comprising the right angle also always represents the shadow, or the distance of some body, and the other side the said body; consequently, the said sides being equal, by the definition of isosceles triangles, it follows that the said shadows or distances, in this case, must be equal in length to the height of their body. When therefore the sun happens to be elevated 45 degrees above the horizon, the Alidade positioned, as said, on the Astrolabe hanging freely, will be disposed to receive and give free passage to the sun's rays through its sights, and consequently, when this happens, marking at the same time the extremity of the shadow of some perpendicular body, such as a tower or pyramid, without doubt the length of the shadow will be equal to the height of the said tower or pyramid, except for what we have noted above in the note on this first proposition.

[Determining Height by Visual Line]
To know the height by the fiducial line. This proposition does not differ in anything from the preceding one for understanding: but instead of the sun's ray, one uses the visual ray. The Alidade therefore being placed and fixed, as in the preceding, on the 45th degree or midpoint of the quadrant of the circle on the side of the said Grid, and the Astrolabe hanging freely by its handle, if on a very level plain one moves back or forward so that through the sights of the said Alidade one can perceive the extremity of some body elevated straight above the said plain, the distance measured between the measurer (or the center of the Astrolabe, that is to say of the said Grid, supposing it were alone and separate) and the said body will infallibly be equal to the height of the said body above the eye or the said center: and consequently, by adding the height of the eye or of the center of the Astrolabe or Grid above the said plain, one will have the entire height of the body to be measured.

[Example: Measuring Pyramid Height]
EXAMPLE, to begin to make known the use by practice: the Alidade being fixed as above on the 45th degree, if by moving back or forward one finally perceives through the pinnules the extremity or point of a pyramid, and by measurement one finds the distance from the midpoint of the foot of the said pyramid to be 15 fathoms: Counting on the horizontal line of the said Grid, from the center, the said number of 15: one will see that the line which falls perpendicularly on the said number is cut by the Alidade at a similar number of 15: consequently the height of the said pyramid will also be 15 fathoms above the eye of the measurer or the center of the Grid: For, as said, all the lines of the said Grid parallel to the horizontal line are analogous and represent the plains on which the observations are made, and the lines perpendicular to the said horizontal line are analogous and represent the bodies elevated straight above the said plains.

[Heights when Sun is More or Less Elevated]
To know the heights when the sun is more or less elevated than 45 degrees. These two propositions are practiced with the sun's ray, which, according to whether it is more or less inclined, makes the shadows of bodies more or less long than the said bodies. Therefore, at whatever height of the sun, the Astrolabe hanging freely, and the Alidade being raised or lowered until the ray passes freely through the sights of the pinnules, if at the same time one makes a mark at the extremity of some shadow proceeding from some body elevated straight, and after having measured the length of the shadow one counts on the horizontal line of the said Grid, from the center, the number of measures, always the other line which is perpendicular to it at the end of the numeration will be cut by the Alidade at the same number of measures as that of the proposed height to be measured from which the said shadow proceeds.

[Example: Measuring Wall Height]
EXAMPLE. Although the matter is clear, nevertheless to help the less experienced, we will guide their hand in these practices with examples. A wall presents itself whose height you wish to know by its shadow: Hang your Astrolabe by its handle and raise or lower the Alidade little by little until the sun's ray passes freely through the sights of the pinnules (which you will recognize when, approaching something against the pinnules, the light appears well rounded.) At the same time, stick a stick at the extremity of the shadow of the said wall, and measure that shadow straight towards the sun: if you find it

[Using the Grid or Square]
of 15 toises, you will count from the center of the Grid, that is to say, from the Astrolabe, along the horizontal line, the said number of 13. And considering the perpendicular raised on the end of the said number of 13, you will count the parallels comprised on the said perpendicular; that is to say, the number of divisions of the said perpendicular comprised between the Alidade and the said horizontal line; and the number of the said parallels or divisions will be the height of the wall. As if the sun were only elevated by 31 degrees, the number of these parallels comprised between the Alidade and the horizontal line would give 7 toises and 3/4 of a toise, or rather 7 toises, 4 feet, 9 inches, and 1/2 of an inch.

[Note 1: Measuring the Shadow]
We have said in this example that one must measure the shadow extending directly towards the sun, to note in passing an inconvenience that can often occur and could mislead the less experienced, which is that if the elevated body, whose height one wishes to know, has some width, and the sun's ray is even slightly oblique, it is important to know and recognize the point at its foot or base that corresponds to that of the summit from which the shadow was cast. This is often difficult to find on the expanse of walls, unless there is some mark, sign, or other thing at the top of the wall that can be easily noticed and distinguished in the length of the shadow. Therefore, for greater precaution, when marking a point at the end of the shadow, one must at the same time note or recognize at the base of the body, wall, tower, or other wide object, some line that corresponds, with respect to the sun, to the point marked in the shadow; or else, by immediately measuring the shadow, draw it directly towards the sun.

[Note 2: Grid Divisions]
It is also to be noted here that one can assign to each division of the said Grid any number one wishes, such as 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 12, and others; and thus no number of measurements will ever be presented that cannot be accommodated and counted on the said Grid to obtain the required estimation. This is especially necessary to consider and observe when the perpendiculars are cut by the Alidade between two parallel lines. As in our example, the perpendicular on the number 13 is cut by the Alidade at a height of 31 degrees between the 7th and 8th parallel, so that one must estimate and judge the value of the two segments, which we have said is 4, and so for the others.

[Proposition 8: Height by Visual Line]
This proposition is nothing other than a repetition of the two preceding ones, but differently applied. In the two preceding ones, a lesser or greater inclination of the sun's ray than 45 degrees is considered; in this one, a lesser or greater inclination of the visual ray is considered. But as we have noted above that in operations with this instrument, the difference between direct or inverse shadows is not considerable, so also this diverse inclination of the visual ray above or below 45 degrees brings no diversity to the operation of this proportion, any more than in the two preceding ones; there being always only one and the same method of practice. And only one and the same position of triangles being observed, all this diversity only serves to diversify the inequality between the bases and the perpendiculars of the said triangles. We will therefore understand the practice of this proposition, as of the two preceding ones, under a single method of operation, which will be as follows.

[Measuring Height of a Plumb Body]
To measure the height of any plumb-elevated body, whose foot or base is freely accessible: Choose a flat and even place, and at whatever distance it may be, holding the Astrolabe, or suspending it by its handle from something, raise or lower the Alidade until the summit of the elevated body is perceived through the sights of the pinnules. Then measure the distance. And on the said grid, mark the perpendicular as distant from the center as the said measured distance contains measures. For the number of parallels comprised on the said perpendicular between the Alidade and the horizontal line will give the height of the said body in a similar number of said measures, always to be taken above the center of the said Grid.

[Example: Pyramid Height]
A pyramid presents itself, of which, to know its height, you look and observe its point from some place through the pinnules of the Alidade, perhaps stopped at the 50th degree of height on the limb. If then, having found by measuring the space between the place of observation and the middle of the base of the said pyramid to be 25 toises, you count how many parallels are comprised between the point where the Alidade cuts the 25th perpendicular and the horizontal line: You will have the number of toises that the height of the said pyramid contains, 41 toises, or 4 feet above the center of the said grid.

[Propositions 9 & 10: Tower Height]
These two propositions are still practiced on this instrument without any distinction of direct or inverse shadow, and we have also coupled them, inasmuch as the operation of one differs in nothing from that of the other; except that in the 10th proposition it is necessary to operate twice, because one seeks two different heights, each of which is found by the method of the 9th. Therefore, when it is proposed to find the height of some tower that cannot be approached because of a ditch, river, or other impediment, it will be necessary to make two observations, as was said on the fourth Geometrical, and in a place chosen so level that the Grid or the Astrolabe is at the same height in both observations: so that the line of distance between them is parallel both to the plane of the place, that is to say, to the horizon, and to the parallel lines of the said Grid, that is to say, that it coincides with the horizontal line of the said Grid. And with this precaution, in the state of the rule or alidade at the time of the first observation of the summit of the said tower, the 10th or 100th, 20th, or any other parallel desired will be chosen among the parallels, and it will be seen and marked at what point of division, counting from the central perpendicular, the said Alidade cuts it. Then in the second observation, which will be made by moving back or forward in a straight line, it will again be seen and marked at what other point of division of the same parallel the said Alidade will meet. This being said, having measured the distance between the said two observations, what proportion the difference of the two points cut by the Alidade on the said parallel has to the distance of the said parallel from the horizontal line, such will the number of measures between the two stations have to the number of measures of the required height to be taken above the center of the said Grid. And this analogy can be easily resolved on the said Grid without any multiplication or division, by only counting the first term from the center of the Grid on the horizontal line, that is to say, for the number of the first term, taking the perpendicular as distant from the first central one, and on it counting the number of the second term from the horizontal line, and at the end of the numeration applying the Alidade, it will cut the parallel corresponding to the number of the third term at a point whose distance from the horizontal line will give the fourth term required for the height of the said tower above the said Grid.

[Example]
null

[Measuring Tower Height with Two Observations]
In the first observation of the summit of a tower surrounded by water, the rule is found on the 35th division point of the 60th parallel; and in the second observation, the rule is met on the 20th point of the same parallel, and the measured distance between the two observations is 9 toises. Therefore, as the difference between 35 and 20, which is 15, is to 60, so 9 toises of distance between the two observations must be to the height of the tower above the trellis. And to obtain this 4th term, you will count 60 divisions on the 15th perpendicular, and applying the rule to the 54th point of the Trellis or Square, you will find that it cuts the 9th perpendicular exactly on the 36th point of its divisions, and that will be the height of the said tower above the central parallel of the said Trellis.

[Measuring Tower Height on a Mountain]
In this way, having measured the height of a tower situated above a mountain, then the height of the said mountain, or rather of the foot of the said tower, by the difference between the two heights, one will have the height of the said tower alone: which is what the said 10th proposition proposes.

[Note on Simple Operation]
It is to be noted here that this is the simple operation and practice of this proposition; one could easily find what is required without any analogical instruction, there being, after having made the first observation, only to draw a line on the said trellis along the alhidade's line, and after having made the second observation and measured the distance between the two, the alhidade remaining in the same state, one will search among the parallels for the one whose divisions comprised between the alhidade and the said line first drawn (that is to say, between the two positions of the alhidade in the two observations) will be equal in number to the measures found between the two observations or stations: for the distance of such a parallel from the first central one will give the exact height required above the said Trellis or Astrolabe.

[Measuring Lengths of Fields and Plains]
As in the preceding propositions we have sought and found the measure of heights on the perpendicular lines of the said Trellis which are analogous to them, so for the practice of this proposition we will seek and find the measure of the lengths of plains and fields on the parallels analogous to them. Therefore, to know the length of some field or the width of some river, the Astrolabe or Trellis being elevated to some known height, the alhidade being disposed in such a way that by its pinnules one can observe the extremity of the proposed length, or the opposite bank of the river, it will cut the parallel corresponding to the number of measures of the height of the Astrolabe at a point as distant in number of divisions as there are similar measures to that of the said height of the Astrolabe between the measurer's staff, or his foot, and the observed extremity.

[Measuring Depths of Wells and Pits]
Since depths are lines perpendicular to the horizon (for it is of such depths that this proposition intends to speak), we will therefore again seek and find their measure on the perpendiculars of the said Trellis, and this by a method as simple as the preceding ones. When, therefore, it is proposed to find the depth of a well, whose width we can freely measure, the Astrolabe being held in hand, or otherwise in such a way that by the pinnules both the inner upper edge and the extremity of the water at the opposite part of the bottom can be sighted and perceived along the same line, the alhidade, in this state, will cut the perpendicular corresponding to the number of measures of the interior width of the well (which we assume to be equal from top to bottom) at a point as distant in number of divisions as there are in the said depth similar measures to that of the width.

[Addition: Measuring Hypotenuses and Ladders]
This is not all; this hanging Trellis goes even further. We have already had the length of the shadow, or the known distance, and the height of the wall: a little more effort will give us the length of a ladder which, placed on the extremity of the shadow or the distance, will touch the top of the wall. In a word, we already have the two sides of a right-angled triangle; we need to find the diagonal or hypotenuse. For this small Trellis can and should also serve for the measurement of all right-angled triangles, and if necessary, of all kinds of rectilinear triangles, just as for the measurement of some simple lengths, heights, or depths. If, therefore, in our example, we want to know the length of the said ladder, that is to say, of the line which would touch at one end the extremity of the shadow, or distance, and at the other the height of the wall, by making a point, or a small mark, easy to erase on the alhidade at the place where it cuts the perpendiculars which give the heights, and this mark being transferred to the first parallel, or to the first perpendicular, it will show between their divisions, from the center to the said point or mark, the length of the said line or ladder.

[Example: Ladder Length Calculation]
For example, if by a known distance of 9 feet one had found the height of a wall to be 30 feet, and one wanted to know the length of a ladder suitable for climbing it, the alhidade remaining in the state of observation of the said height, and a mark being made on the point where it cuts the 16th perpendicular, the said alhidade being transferred to the horizontal line, or to the first and central perpendicular, it will be found to comprise between its center and the said marked point on it 34 divisions, and of so many measures will be the length of the ladder which will join the extremities of the distance and the height of the said wall.

[End of Propositions on the Geometric Square]
End of Propositions on the Geometric Square or Trellis. We have also found it appropriate to add here some brief demonstrations which are found added in previous impressions to strengthen and secure the use of the Geometric Square, and this to satisfy those who, being pleased with them, might have desired them in this impression as well as in the preceding ones, and to correct what we have recognized as missing in some places.

[Demonstrations for the Gnomon]
DEMONSTRATIONS FOR THE PRACTICE AND USE OF THE GNOMON, OR THE ALTIMETRIC SCALE. And Firstly: Of the dimensions that are made by a single line.

[Gnomon Practice and Similar Triangles]
To better retain the practice of the Gnomon or Altimetric Scale, we have here placed a demonstration which serves generally for dimensions that are found by three known terms, of which the third can be measured to have the fourth which is unknown. This is done by two similar and orthogonal triangles, of which one is formed within the said Gnomon, and the other outside: inasmuch as the thing

[Measuring Height with the Gnomon]
5. 6. Demonstration for the practice and use of measuring whether something is high, deep, long, or wide, is always equidistant or parallel to one of the sides of the said Gnomon. Therefore, the fiducial or visual line that intersects them causes similar angles. Thus, by the similarity of triangles, the sides are proportional. For if the said visual line intersects the Scale of the direct shadow, then the height of the thing to be measured will have the same proportion to 12 as the distance of the thing to the number of points on the said Scale of the direct shadow. Similarly, the depth of a thing will have the same proportion to 12 as the width to the number of points of the direct shadow. As you can see in the first figure where the height of a tower is A, E, and your station at point C, where the fiducial line intersects the Scale of the direct shadow at point F. Now the line of station C G is parallel to A B, but because the visual line F C A intersects them at points C and A, angle C of triangle F C G will be equal to angle A of triangle C A B, by the second part of the 29th proposition of the 1st book of Euclid, by which also angle F of triangle C F G is equal to angle C of triangle A C B: therefore the two right-angled triangles F G C and C B A are equiangular, so the sides opposite similar angles are proportional, as Euclid demonstrates in the 4th Proposition of his 6th book. The proportion then of FG to GC is as CB to BA. Of these four, three are given, namely F G and C G, which are from the Gnomon, and C B by measurement. Therefore, by the rule of proportion, the fourth, B A, will be known.

[Measuring Depth with the Gnomon]
Similarly, it must be understood that when the said fiducial line intersects the scale of the inverse shadow, as at point H of the same figure, and the station is D. Then the height of the thing to be measured will have such a proportion to the number of points of the inverse shadow as the distance to 12. And the depth with respect to the said points of the direct shadow will be what the width is with respect to 12. For by the first part of the said 29th Proposition, angle H of triangle EHD is equal to angle A of triangle D A B: And the angles opposite at point D are equal by the 15th of the first; therefore the two right-angled triangles are similar, and for this reason the sides will be proportional: therefore, as there are three known terms, namely DE, EH, and DB by measurement, consequently the fourth, which is AB, will be known.

[Measuring Inaccessible Heights (Two Stations)]
Of Dimensions made by two stations. II. PROPOSITION. Now if the thing to be measured is inaccessible, then the 3rd and 4th terms will be unknown, so it is necessary to operate differently from above, the demonstration of which follows. Let A B in the first figure be the height of the tower which cannot be approached, and let it first be that the fiducial line at stations C and D intersects the Scale of the inverse shadow at points F and H. Therefore, in the two triangles F D E and A D B, due to their similarity, F E is contained as many times in E D as A B in B D; therefore E D (which in the instrument is 12 points) being divided by F E, yields a number demonstrating how many times A B is in B D. Similarly, due to the similarity of triangles H C G and A C B, it is found that G H is contained as many times in E C as A B in B C: therefore the number demonstrating the quotient or how many times A B is in B C will be known: consequently the quotient of A B in C D will be known. Therefore, C D being divided by that quotient number, A B results, to which the height must be added to obtain the desired height.

[Euclidean Proof for Inaccessible Heights]
This consequence is drawn from the 19th of the 5th Book of Euclid. For since D B is to A B as D E is to E F by the similarity of the two triangles D E F, D B A: the ratio of D E to E F being known, that of D B to B A will also be known: but by the similarity of the two triangles C G H, C B A, C B is also to B A as C G to G H: consequently since the ratio of C G to G H is known, that of C B to B A will also be known; the ratio therefore of each of the two D B and B C to the same B A is known: but D B is the whole, and B C is the part; therefore, by the said 19th, if the whole D B and its part C B have a given ratio to B A, then the other remaining part C D will also have a given and known ratio to B A: but C D is given and known by measurement, therefore B A will also be given and known. For by multiplying the number of measures of C D by the term of the known ratio corresponding to A B, and dividing the product by the term of the said ratio corresponding to C D, the value of A B will be obtained in the same measures as C D. As if the known ratio of C D to A B is 1 to 3, and C D is measured as 20 fathoms: multiplying 20 by 3, and dividing the product 60 by 1, we will have 60 fathoms for A B. And this is what the preceding demonstration means when it adds: Therefore C D being divided by the quotient number, A B results. And inasmuch as from the same observations above, and by the same method, we have obtained the knowledge of the distance as of B C. We will further add, since in the same figure by the similarity of triangles D E F, D B A, and of triangles C G H, and C B A, D B is to A B as D E is to E F, and C B is to B A as C G to G H, that the two rectangles G H in C B, and E F in D B are equal to each other, each of them being equal to a third, namely C G or D E in B A by the 16th of the 6th book of Euclid. But by the 14th of the same book, the two rectangles D B in E F, and C B in G H being equal, their sides will be proportional, and therefore as G H is to E F, so D B is to C B, and by dividing as G H minus E F, that is F H is to E F, so D B minus C B, that is C D is to C B: but the first two terms F, and F H, the difference between G H and E F, are known on the Gnomon or Scale of the Square, the third D C is also known by measurement, therefore the fourth B C will also be known, which was to be demonstrated. We will also add here the proper and particular demonstration for the second method that we have added above on the subject of inaccessible heights proposed to be measured, and this by reduction of inverse shadows to direct shadows, in order to divide the product of the multiplication of the entire side of the square by the number of measures of the interval between the observations, by the difference of the said direct shadows, in order to obtain a quotient equal in number to the measures of the proposed height above the center of the Astrolabe.

[Shadow Conversion and Astrolabe Height]
Let then, in the 3rd figure added by us, H be the height proposed to be measured A R, and the two observations at points C and D such that the two visual rays or fiducial lines A C, A D cut the side of the inverse shadow, in the first observation at point H, and in the second and further away at point F, the height of the Astrolabe in these two observations being C S or D T, that is B R. It is therefore necessary first to show the reason why in the aforesaid second general method, conversion from inverse shadow to direct shadow is made, and how this conversion brings no change or difference in the measurement. Inasmuch as, by the construction of the Astrolabe or Geometric square, the two lines C G, K I are parallel, as also the two C H, G H are parallel: The line C H, by the 19th of the first of Euclid, falling between them makes the angles H C G, C I K equal, as also I C K and C H Q equal. Therefore the triangle C K H is similar to the triangle H G C, and consequently as H G is to G C, so C K, that is G G, will be to K I: but H G is inverse shadow, and K I is direct shadow: therefore the proposed height B A is to the distance B C in the same proportion as C K to K I (direct shadow), as H G (inverse shadow) is to C G: that is to say, the same proportion is maintained, after the conversion of the entire side of the square to its parts.

[Measuring Height with Right Shadows]
of the right shadow, which previously from the parts of the versed shadow on the same entire side of the square, we will say the same of the two triangles FED, DLM. To demonstrate then that by means of the two known right shadows KI & LK, or rather by their difference, we can ascertain the measure of a proposed height. We say that in Figure 34, due to the parallels AB & CK, or DL, just as BC & KI, or LM, the triangle ABC is made similar to triangle CKI, and triangle ABD to triangle DLM. Therefore, as ML is to DB, so DB will be to BA, and similarly as IK is to KC, so CB will be to BA. And by permutation, as ML is to DB, so LD will be to BA, and as IK is to CB, so KC, that is, its equal LD, will be to the same BA. Therefore, by equal reason, as ML is to DB, so IK, that is, NL cut, its equal, is to CB. And by the 19th of the 5th book of Euclid, the remainder MN will be to the remainder DC as the whole ML is to the whole DB. But we have already found that ML is to DB as LD is to BA; therefore MN will also be to DC as LD is to BA. Now the first three terms are known, namely MN, the difference of the two numbers of the right shadow; DC, the interval of the observations; and LD, the whole number of the Scale or Geometric Square. Therefore, the fourth term BA will be known in the same measures as DC.

[Adding Astrolabe Height]
It remains to show, regarding the said 34th figure, why the height of the Astrolabe is added to the height found by analogy. This is because if we suppose the Gnomon or Altimetric Scale, assuming that the Astrolabe is elevated to the same height, as it should be, in two observations, the line passing through the center of the Astrolabe, such as DC, being horizontal, and therefore considered parallel to the horizontal plane RO, if it is extended to the proposed height, it will cut off a height, such as BR, equal to CS or DT, which are the two heights of the Astrolabe that we always assume to be equal. Therefore, BK being known by analogy, and BR by the elevation and height of the instrument, the entire known height AR will be obtained from the two combined and assembled parts, which was what was proposed to find.

[Measuring Inaccessible Height (Second Method)]
But if it happens in the two sections that the fiducial line intersects the scale of the right shadow, as at points M & L in the 4th figure, the operation will be different from what it has been described above. For one must multiply the distance between the two stations by 12, and divide the sum by the difference of the points, and the demanded height will result. For the demonstration of this, see the said 4th figure. For the similarity of triangles MCP and CAB, the proportion of MP to CB is as PC to AB. Similarly, the proportion of LP to DB is as PD to AB. And because the proportion of PC to BA is similar to the proportion of PD to BA, it follows that the proportion of MP to CB is as LP to DB. Therefore, by the 19th proposition of the 5th book of Euclid, the remainder LM to the remainder DC is as the total LP to the total DB. But LP to DB is as PD to BA, therefore LM to DC is as PD to BA. Of these four, the three LM, DC, and PD are known, therefore the fourth BA, which we seek, will be known.

[Easier Inaccessible Height Measurement]
We can even more easily obtain the height of an object that cannot be approached, provided that two stations can be made, in one of which the fiducial line is with the line of the middle shadow, and the other at will. For then one must multiply the distance of the stations by the number of points, and divide the sum by the difference that the said points have to 12, and the height of the object will result, which will always be equal to the distance of your first station.

[Example: Versed Shadow Measurement]
As in the 5th figure, if the distance of the stations CD was 10 paces, and the fiducial line intersecting the scale of the versed shadow at point F, 8 points. Let us therefore multiply CD, 10 paces, by GF, 8 points, and 80 will result. These being divided by FH, 4 points, 10 will result: so many paces does AB, which is the height, or BC, which is the distance of the first station, contain. The Demonstration. For the similarity of the triangles in the said 5th figure, the proportion of CG to GH is as CB to BA. And because CG is equal to GH, we therefore conclude that CD is equal to AB. Similarly, the proportion of DG to GF is as DB to BA. Now by the 16th proposition of the 6th book of Euclid, what is of CG in AB is equal to what is of GH in CB. Similarly, what is of DG in AB will be equal to what is of GF in DB. But because in each of the said similarities the first and the fourth are always the same and equal, it therefore follows that what is of GF in DB is equal to what is of GH in CB; therefore the proportion of GF to GH is as CB to DB by the second part of the said 16th proposition. The remainder FH to the remainder CD will therefore be as the total GH to the total BD, by the said 19th proposition of the 5th book. And because FH to CD, and GF to BG are each in the same proportion as the total to the total, the proportion therefore of FH to GD will be as GF to BC. Of these four, three are known, therefore the fourth CB, which is equal to AB, will be known.

[Single Station Inaccessible Height]
ADDITION. We will conclude this small treatise with a brief demonstration of the method we have given above, for finding from a single station the measures of a proposed inaccessible height. Let AR therefore be the proposed height in the 6th and last figure. And from a single station at point C, let the first observation be made with the Astrolabe elevated. Then, with the Astrolabe elevated at D, let the second be made. And let it be that in both, the rule or the two visual rays ACF and ADE cut the side of the versed shadow at points E and F. Let also from the imagined point C another visual ray be drawn parallel to ADE, namely CI, that is to say, making HI equal to GE, and drawing IC up to K. Now, because of the parallels AR, DS, GF, the angles BAC, CFH are said to be equal, as also BKC, CIH, that is DEG equal. And therefore, triangle BKC is similar to triangle CIH, or to its equal DEG, and triangle KAC to triangle CFH, and triangle KAG, that is ACD, to triangle CFI. Therefore, as CH is to HF, so CB is to BA, and as CH is to HI, so CB is to BK. And by permutation, as CH is to CB, so HF is to BA, and HI is to BK. Therefore, by the 19th of the 5th book, the remainder IF will be to the remainder AK, that is, its equal DC, as the total HF to the total AB. But the first three terms, IF (difference of the points of the versed shadow), CD (difference in height of the Astrolabe), and HF (points of the lowest observation), are known. And therefore the fourth proportional term AB will also be known in the same measures as those of the difference in height CD. To this fourth term, adding BK, the height of the Astrolabe in the said lowest observation, the entire proposed height AR will be obtained, which was what needed to be found.

[Note on Figures]
The Reader will be advised here that, for design and for greater convenience, we have had the figures of this present small treatise printed separately on a sheet, so that the said sheet, being unfolded, the figures can always be placed in view to facilitate understanding.

[End of Propositions]
I could have been briefer, but not clearer. End of the Spherical, Astronomical, & Geometrical Propositions, on the Use of the Astrolabe. D. A. L. G. Extract from the King's Privilege.

[Royal Privilege for Printing]
By grace and privilege of the King, Jean Moreau, bookseller in Paris, is permitted to print or have printed and engrave a Universal Astrolabe, and to sell and distribute a book entitled 'The Use of the Universal and Particular Astrolabe'. All booksellers, printers, engravers, and other persons of whatever quality or condition they may be, are forbidden to print, engrave, or have engraved, sell, or distribute the said book and instrument, unless they have been printed or engraved by the said Moreau, or with his consent, for a period of ten years, under the penalties stipulated by the said Privilege. Given in Paris this twenty-eighth of August 1621. Signed by the King in his Council, RENOUARD. Completed printing on April 8, 1625.

[Errata for the Book]
Errors to correct in this book, discovered during the author's absence. Page 1, line 5, read (third particular. Of the); line 4, read (universal the one); p. 5 line 11, read (setting the proper); p. 8, read everywhere (equal); p. 15 l. 5, read (Northern,); l. 6 read (Southern.); l. 10 read (Sun, otherwise Ecliptic,); l. 15, read (when); p. 15 l. 50 read (minutes of hour); p. 21 l. 15 read (truncated); pag. 28 l. 2 read (the Astrolabe); l. 11 read (the Astrolabe, that); p. 31. l. 14 read (common); p. 34 l. 5 read (referring to the numbers written near); p. 41 l. 10 read (of these tables); p. 42 l. 5 remove (J); p. 45 l. 16. read (meridian than of all others); p. 50 l. 50 read in 4. And for each division point trace); p. 55 l. 2. read (first); p. 54 l. 1. read (times); p. 59 l. 1 read (besides); l. 10 read (hundreds with); p. 69 l. 14 read (the use of the Astrolabe); p. 72 l. 1 read (consequently) (firstly); p. 75 l. 8 read (reduced); l. 11 read (fifteenth); p. 84 l. 25 read (the Astrolabe with); p. 95 l. 15 read (we will speak to); p. 96 l. penultimate read (10 hours & one third); p. 99 l. 4 read (differences, such as); l. 11 read (obscure); p. 102 l. 17 read (constitution); p. 104 l. 15 read (to the limb: afterwards); p. 109 l. 12. read (or it should then); p. 111 l. 1 read (described); p. 115 l. penultimate read (with 24, which is very close to 2 hours for); p. 116 l. 4 read (equal hours); p. 119 l. 9 read (co-descension in 9:); p. 131 l. 11 read (meridian and the circle); p. 136 l. 10 read (transferred to); p. 137 l. 3 read (of 58 degrees); l. 12 read (of 40 degrees); p. 140 l. last read (four quarters); p. 141 l. 28 read (height that the Sun has been); p. 145 l. 15 read (And note, if it is easy to examine); p. 147 l. 17 read (some of the stars); p. 151 l. 12 read (triangle on the rule); p. 171 l. 9 read (and 53 minutes); p. 174 l. 8 read (around); p. 181 l. 4 read (from one place to another) or); l. penultimate read (difference in longitude); p. 183 l. penultimate read (of ~ of an hour); l. antepenultimate read (eastern); p. 184 l. 6 read (some miles); p. 189. l. 25 read (several others); p. 194 l. 26. read (drawn); l. 27 read (Munster); p. 196 l. 1 read (least latitude 8.); l. 19 read (the said 11 degrees); l. 27 read (terrestrial distance); p. 197 l. 7. read (parallel to count from the same pole;); l. 20 read (15, 26, & 27); l. 23 read (Crugerus); p. 199 verso, instead of 200, 180 has been resumed: up to the said 199 for distinction; for which we will add here to the numbers resumed bis. pag. 181 bis l. penultimate, read (Right Sphere); p. 183 l. 9 read (and their opposites); p. 185 bis l. 15 read (more than 15 degrees); p. bis 188 l. antepenultimate read (particularly); p. 189 bis l. 11. read (right, & see under which & what meridian it); p. 191 bis l. 4 read (which it); l. 17 read (the Ascension); p. 196 bis l. 1 read (will be found to cut); p. 202 l. 17 read (for the instant); p. 204 in the figure write in the middle (the 4 angles of an Astronomical figure); p. 207 l. 4. read (the celestial figures); p. 208 l. 4 read (circumspect experience); p. 210 l. 3 read (of the six others); p. 213 read p. 215 [read p. [215]]; p. 137 l. 4 read [around]; p. 145 l. penultimate read [if 21]; p. 146 l. 11 read [complement]; p. 148 l. 15 read [and northern Occidental:]; p. 150 l. 15 read [latitude and -]; p. 159 l. 1 read [length and width]; l. 16. read [but since]; p. 160 l. 11 read [as distant]; ibid. l. 18 read [in two equally]; p. 181 l. 7 read [this proposition]; p. 183 l. 8 read [a space]; p. 184. l. 12 read [or, ~ of length]; p. 285 l. 8 read [then the distance]; p. 286 l. 6 read [the height]; l. 9 read [same thing]; l. penultimate read [approaching can be?]; p. 289 l. 12 read [proportional]; l. 15. read [notable]; p. 293 l. 10 read [and 7. [p. 294 l. 7 read number multiplied)]; p. 298 l. 1 read (proposition); p. 299 l. 9 read (ciphers or); p. 300 read (the use); p. 311 l. 20 read (subtracting 7 from 50); p. 311 l. 1 read (be to another); p. 327 l. 21 read (height of Astrolabe); p. 328 l. 26 read (in the two observations); p. 334 l. 14. read (from one reason to another); p. 346 l. 27 read (will have to the depth.); p. 347 l. 17 read (in the vacuum, imitates nature in expressing them); p. 347 verso, quote 348, and following 349, 350, etc., always increasing by ten, and following this p. 349 l. 3 read (such proportion); p. 355 l. 8. read (visual line); p. 359 read (VIII. Prop. etc.). There are some other slight orthographical errors which are left to the reader's discretion.