[The Nature of Celestial Signs and Constellations]
Finally, observe that the author here understands by "images" the constellations of the eighth sphere, which are formed from many stars gathered together, and which create figures of living things. For there are two kinds of signs: One kind consists of those which are understood to be in the outermost or tenth sphere, and these are either the dodecatemoria of the zodiac, about which we have already spoken, or the twelve regions of the universal heaven, whose beginning is taken from the intersection of the vernal equinox. For example, the sign of Aries of the ninth or tenth sphere is the space of the heaven that extends 30 parts from the vernal intersection towards the North. The dodecatemorion of the heaven succeeding Aries is Taurus, to which the remaining dodecatemoria then succeed in order. The other kind of signs is to be understood in the eighth sphere, adorned with that infinite number of fixed stars, and these are not equal spaces of the zodiac, but constellations of stars impressed upon the heaven. I say constellations of stars, because "fidus" (constellation) and "stella" (star) do not mean the same thing, but just as in Greek "aster" and "astron" are different, so in Latin "stella" and "fidus" are distinct. A "stella" or "aster" is singular, like all the wandering stars and all the others that move alone, not mixed with others. But a "fidus" or "astron" is formed from the gathering of several stars, such as Aries, Taurus, etc., the greater and lesser bears, and whatever various kinds of things are believed to be received into the heaven. Nor indeed is it to be thought, as some have taught, that the position of the stars presents such figures to our eyes in the sky, or that lines connecting the lights of the constellation form images of living things. For what resemblance is there between the image of a celestial Aries and the figure of a terrestrial Aries, or between the taurine image and the figure of a terrestrial ox? I believe that the celestial constellations are circumscribed by the figures of inferior things and living beings primarily for this reason: that names could be given to the more prominent and observable stars, and that in such a great number of stars, many could be described more briefly by being encompassed by a single word, and finally, once perceived, could be more easily retained in memory. Therefore, these figures are voluntary, that is, not made by nature, but transferred by the will of artisans into the heaven, or rather from the heaven onto celestial globes. Since this is so, it is clear that the doctrine of the "stoicheiomatikoi," who engrave those seals and images of stars delineated by painters on celestial globes for healing diseases of body and mind, is empty, superstitious, and supported by no physical causes. Furthermore, even if that celestial position of the stars formed such images in the sky, nevertheless, since figures and all quantities in general, just as they have no efficacy whatsoever in themselves, so too they cannot receive any power of effecting from elsewhere, it would be manifest madness to attribute to engraved images the power of receiving celestial influence. But that we clearly see certain forms of things in this sublunar world agreeing with and changing with individual celestial bodies, and indeed with certain regions of the sky, this is to be judged prudently to happen not because of the figure, but rather because of the congruence of the temperature of the substances themselves, just as the magnet is affected more particularly by iron than by other things, so much so that it always and without any intermission turns towards the north; this happens not because of the figure, but rather because of the agreement of temperature, or some other hidden force of the north and the sympathetic nature of the magnet. By such a physical and experimentally proven reasoning, it should be believed that the learned and wise antiquity divided the entire heaven into effigies of things, and imposed names on the constellations that were consistent with their effects. Thus, Taurus received its name because it makes people laborious, with a raised and prominent forehead, and because it particularly affects animals of that kind among us more than others. Potanus narrates that the conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus in his time caused the most horrible cold of winter and brought great calamity to oxen. And although a sheep is weaker in tolerating cold, yet the plague raged more violently among oxen because of the celestial sign to which the terrestrial ox is referred. If this conjunction had been in Aries, it would undoubtedly have raged more fiercely among sheep. Similarly, Leo and Canis received their names because they make people hot, choleric, fierce, cruel, prone to tyranny and injury, and rapacious. In the same way, all other images found their names from the property of their effect: such as Draco, Scorpio, Serpens from poison; Cassiopeia and Andromeda, because they portend prisons. Therefore, in astrological judgments, both universal and natal, the kinds of events are derived from the nature of the signs. For example, if a malefic threatens from Gemini, that evil is inflicted by a human, since that sign is human. Those whom chariots crush, whom quadrupeds tear apart, these are afflicted by unfortunate stars in their nativities, to whose images the forms of these things are subject. Ptolemy mentions these properties in the images in the first book, chapter "On Masculine and Feminine Animals," near the end. And in the fourth book, chapter "On the Quality of Death," and in many other places, he attributes much to them, calling them "morphoses" and "asterisms," and sometimes even "zoea." They are also called "ourania" and "stoicheia ourania," from which the "stoicheiomatikoi" took their name. Nor should it offend anyone that some authors have enumerated more, and others fewer, effigies, since such a distribution of the heaven was made by men not of one age, but of many centuries, in which these studies flourished. Therefore, it must be believed that these celestial images have been augmented, diminished, and finally changed as the matter itself demanded, due to various circumstances and forces discovered in the stars. Pliny in the second book, chapter 41, narrates that there are seventy-two signs or effigies into which the experts divided the heaven. But we should believe Ptolemy, who circumscribed one thousand twenty-two stars, notable by sight and effect, out of innumerable stars, with forty-eight images, of which twenty-one incline towards the North, and fifteen towards the South. The remaining twelve interweave the zodiac, which is why the author believes they precisely correspond with the dodecatemoria of the outermost sphere. For he writes thus: "The twelve parts of the Zodiac are called signs, and they refer to the images that are under the same Zodiacal circle." And although these do not disagree with Ptolemy, who also wants the dodecatemoria to be called by the adjacent forms of the signs, some quadrupedal, some terrestrial, some "hegemonikos," and others differently: nevertheless, in Ptolemy's time, when the first star of the Asterism of Aries was at the vernal intersection, they could only have a place, and by no means could they be accommodated without gross error to our times, in which the same first star of Aries has progressed from the apparent vernal equinox by 27 parts and a little more, as the calculation of the Prutenic tables shows. In the same way, the other constellations of the eighth sphere have made similar progressions into the succeeding dodecatemoria of the outermost spheres. The names of all celestial constellations, however, Joachim Camerarius...

[Planetary Powers and Dignities]
DIFFERENCES. For if they obtain the Midheaven, they especially indicate the native's fortune and estimation; if the Ascendant, they will indicate more about the body and mind. The same must be understood concerning the planets, whose cosmic dispositions are, first, those which are attributed to them simply by reason of their own powers and temperaments, which the author pursues in the second difference. Then there are other powers in the planets, which they acquire from communication and familiarity with signs of the same nature. For example, if the Sun is in Leo, its virtue will be increased by the temperament suitable to the sign of Leo. Thus Cancer is suitable for the Moon, Aries for Mars, Sagittarius for Jupiter. Similarly, the other signs are familiar to certain planets and are connected in many other ways. From this follow those planetary powers which they acquire by reason of the Sun and their own rays, and whatever else is explained in the third difference. The remaining planetary powers, which they receive with respect to the chart or figure of the heavens, and from the constitution of time, are accidental. In this way, in a nocturnal nativity, Jupiter, however, will be understood to be better tempered in a diurnal nativity. Similarly, it is accidental that in the Imum Coeli, or another abject place, they are unfortunate warriors; on the contrary, placed in the Midheaven, they are said to make one martial and fortunate in battle; placed in the ascending part of the heavens, they cause wounds to the head, and are said to decree something else for the native in other places. Having shown the order, let us now proceed to the exposition of the powers which the signs receive from the nature of the planets, or rather, which the planets receive from the nature of the signs. But since the power of any planet is increased or diminished more in some places than in others, for this reason these powers of qualities and weaknesses are distinguished by certain appellations. The most principal place, and more congruent than others to the nature and temperament of the planet, they call the house. This is followed by exaltation; then the triplicity; then the term or boundary. The last is the decan, which the Arabs, like many other things, seem to have invented contrary to nature and the opinion of Ptolemy. What each of these can do will be said below, after we have made each of them very clear with a broader exposition. First, however, we must explain the series of houses. The Sun and Moon have each obtained signs in which they have dominion and established rule. And the sign of Leo is masculine for the Sun, while the sign of the Moon is feminine, prudently—

[Planetary Dignity in Signs]
Although the Sun is said to rejoice in a place familiar to it by testimony, it is nevertheless said to rejoice if it is associated with other stars of the same sect. For example, if the Sun is in Pisces, in the bounds and house of Jupiter, it is said to rejoice not as if in its own place, but in the place of a friend. That such dignity of planets in signs is far weaker than all others, the matter itself indicates, and Ptolemy explicitly warns. For he says that in this way, although some communication of strength occurs due to similarity, it is nevertheless slight and of little efficacy. His words are these: "They say that it rejoices when the place itself is not familiar, but nevertheless to another of its own condition, which reason of congruence, although it is drawn from distant things, nevertheless some communication is thought to exist due to similarity." From what has been said, it is clear that Ptolemy and the author, according to the opinion of Dorotheus, have signified to us in one phrase a plainly diverse σωοικείωσιμ (familiarity) of stars with signs: the former as very weak, the latter as very strong; so much so that the author's joy does not so much agree with Ptolemy's joy as with the throne or seat that planets acquire in places where they are associated by two or more principal testimonies of familiarity. We will say more about this below.

[Second Difference: Nature of Seven Planets]
Since, with God's help, we have now completed what we proposed to discuss concerning the circle of the signs and its accidents, let us now pursue the intention of the seven planets, their natures, their existence, and what they signify. In all astrological treatises, the author proposes either the spaces and parts of the sky or the stars for contemplation. And the spaces of the sky are distinguished in various ways. First, by longitude, as in the dodecatemoria and 360 parts, etc. Then by latitude and declination into the sides of the world, one of which is examined by reason of the Ecliptic, the other by reason of the Equinoctial. Afterwards, there is a certain difference in the spaces of the sky by reason of their substance. Hence, some parts of the sky are more fortunate, brighter, smokier, colder, drier, wetter, more arid, more fertile, etc., than others. Finally, with the daily revolution of the world, individual parts of the sky sometimes obtain the ascendant, sometimes the midheaven, sometimes the descendant, sometimes the Imum Coeli, and by reason of their varied position in the world, they also vary their effects. And all these things were briefly and schematically expounded in the first difference, as was fitting, in the Isagoge. The second difference follows, in which, as order demands, he institutes a discussion of the power, efficacy, and significations of the stars. There are two kinds of stars: Fixed and Wandering. The wandering stars, which have their own peculiar motions, and these diverse, not common with the others, besides the two luminaries in such a multitude that exceeds number, only five have been noted in all ages, namely, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury. And they are commonly called by the Greek word Planeta, from πλανέω, that is, I wander or roam, not indeed because they wander and roam with an uncertain course, but because of the dissimilarity and variety of their motion. For now they are hidden, and now they reappear, sometimes receding from the Sun, sometimes approaching it. Now they precede it, now they follow it, sometimes they seem to move slower, sometimes faster, sometimes not to move at all, but to stand still. All other stars are called ἀπλανῶς, that is, non-wandering or fixed, adhering to the sky: so called from antiquity, not because they are entirely devoid of their own motion, but because, adhering to one eighth sphere, with that very slow motion, that is, they scarcely pass one degree from west to east in a hundred years, and thus carried together, they perpetually maintain the same distance among themselves, and constantly maintain the same relation to the Sun's Ecliptic, never changing their places, intervals, shapes, and magnitudes in their orbit, which is proper to the wandering stars, which now stand in this part of the sky, now in another, sometimes approaching these, sometimes those stars. In apogees they appear small and obscure, in perigees larger and brighter. And this is the main difference between wandering and fixed stars. For the planets acquire different distances among themselves at different times, and sometimes a northern, sometimes a southern relation to the Sun's Ecliptic. They also differ in radiance: For planets do not scintillate like fixed stars, except Mars: which, due to its darker and reddish light, seems to scintillate like a flame. As for the distance from us, the fixed stars are superior to the wandering ones, which the eyes also discern, especially when the wandering stars traverse the perigees of their orbits. Finally, the fixed stars always maintain the same magnitude. The magnitude of the wandering stars, however, varies with their approach to and recession from the earth. For example: Venus in apogee has an apparent diameter of 7 first scruples. In perigee, however, 10 scruples. Thus the Sun in its highest apogee occupies 32 scruples, in its lowest 33 scruples. The Moon in its highest apogee shows 31 scruples, in its lowest 35. Similarly, Jupiter and Saturn's apparent diameters decrease in apogees and increase in perigees by one scruple of the sky. And although each of the fixed stars always retains the same amplitude, not all have obtained the same magnitude, but are distinguished by a difference of six orders of magnitude. Stars of the first magnitude are those which have an apparent diameter of 8 scruples. Antiquity numbered 15 such among the fixed stars, such as Palilicium, Aldebaran, Spica Virginis, Capella, Fidicula, Sirius, Procyon, Fomalhaut, and the rest. Among the wandering stars, however, Jupiter and Saturn. Stars of the second magnitude have an apparent diameter of 6 scruples, and there are 45 such in the sky, and among the wandering stars, Venus and Mars. Stars of the third magnitude are reckoned at 208 in the sky, and their apparent diameter is 4 scruples. The apparent diameter of stars of the fourth magnitude is 3 scruples, of which the number in the sky is 474, and among the wandering stars, Mercury. Stars of the fifth magnitude are numbered 216, and have an apparent diameter of 2 scruples. Finally, the number of stars of the sixth magnitude is 50, whose apparent diameter occupies one scruple of the sky. To all these must be added 9 obscure and 5 nebulous stars. There are therefore in total 1029 stars observed in the sky by artisans from an innumerable multitude, of which five with the two luminaries are planets: the remaining 1022 they call fixed and adhering to the sky. Indeed, the greater and more powerful part of the fixed stars are circumscribed by 48 forms of animals and things, which the Greeks, as said before, sometimes call αστερισμός, sometimes μορφώματα, sometimes σχήματα, sometimes ζώδια. The rest, however, which are not contained in those images, but are adjacent to them, are called ἀμόρφωτοι αστέρες, that is, unformed stars. Moreover, although the efficacy of the fixed stars is very great, and they must necessarily be observed in all judgments, the author has passed them over in silence. Therefore, we will not hesitate to repeat and explain more clearly in this place those 48 celestial μορφώσφs, proposed above in verses. While reciting, we will also incidentally add their proper names, natures, places, and latitudes: both of those stars contained in these asterisms, and also of those which are adjacent to them, but only of the more significant ones, which are most observed because of their significant effects, and which are found everywhere in the books of poets and other good authors. We will begin, with Ptolemy, with the most powerful ones that fall into the zodiac, and then proceed from north to south. TWELVE STARS The constellations interwoven with the zodiac. In the asterism of Aries, its first star and the following one in the horn, are of the third magnitude, of the nature of Saturn and Mars. The first is today distant from the vernal intersection by 27 and a third parts, with northern latitude.

[The Sun's Influence and Significations]
The Sun is fortunate by aspect, and unfortunate by conjunction in one sign. It is masculine, diurnal, and produces heat and dryness. It signifies fathers if the nativity is by day. It signifies great kingship, the vital soul, light, splendor, intellect, beauty, purity, and faith. In terms of age, it signifies the end of youth. It participates with all planets in the disposition of years. In terms of professions, it signifies governance and rulership, the throwing of spears and hunting, and purification with every kind of cleansing that purifies bodies internally and externally. In terms of illnesses, it signifies hot and dry diseases appearing in the body. In terms of substance, it signifies much gold and all kinds of substances. In terms of the quality of the soul, it signifies sublimity, prudence, and what follows honesty, namely generosity, glory, and breadth of mind. In terms of sects, good culture and its like. It signifies the power of voice and the strength of swiftness. If Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies stewardship and this kind of rulership. If Jupiter, it signifies rulership in faith and religion, and also a judge among men judging the oppressed or injuries, etc. If Mars, it signifies the leadership of an army and the investigation of wars. If Venus, it signifies kingship through women and through the obedience of the powerful. If Mercury, it signifies the counselors of kings, the work of books, inheritances of greater works. If the Moon, it signifies the work of ambassadors and the detection of counsels, and similar things. And some have said that the Sun signifies the image of a man's face, and specifically the right eye in men and the left eye in women. And some have said that it rules the heart, marrow, and thighs. And in terms of illnesses, the eating of flesh in the mouth, specifically damage to the mouth, and the descent of water into the eye. Its power is in the head. And the Indians said that when it is in the ascendant, it will be burning and will have a mark on the face. And in terms of colors, it has whatever appears as a foreign color, and in terms of tastes, acrid. And the quantity of its orb is 15 degrees. And in terms of days, it has Sunday, and in terms of nights, Thursday night. Its Firdaria years are ten. And its greater years are 120, its greatest are 1460, its medium are 39 and a half, or according to some, 69 and a half, and its lesser are 19. Its strength in the regions of the circle is in the east. And Messahala said that it signifies among the figures of men, one who has a color between yellowish-black, that is, brown, covered with redness, short in stature, curly-haired, bald, of beautiful body. It has an acute taste. And Dorotheus said that the figure of the Sun and Moon is the figure of the planets that are with them, and whichever is more dignified in their place. So if you want to know the figure of the Sun, know that it is yellowish, having a reddish part of the hair, its eyes somewhat yellowish. And in terms of parts, it has a part of future things, that is, a part of divination. And it is the significator of natures and the spirit of wisdom, elevation of perfection, also faith, sciences, and praises. And in terms of parts of the world, it has Zamarach and Cura Ferit, its boundaries, and the lands of the Romans.

[Venus's Influence and Significations]
Venus is fortunate, feminine, nocturnal, and is the significator of women, wives, and mothers, if the nativity is diurnal. It produces little heat and great humidity, or moderate cold and humidity. And in terms of age, it has youth or adolescence. And in terms of professions, instruments of games, also beautiful ornaments and figures, and games of dice and chess, and dances and leisure and fornication and fornicators, and children of fornication and much coitus, and all kinds of luxury, the composition of crowns and their use, and beauty and purity, also clothes and ornaments, gold, silver, and love, games, laughter, and joy, the use of various ointments and species, drinking and drunkenness, it believes all these things. It also signifies generosity, love, diligence, and affection, justice and houses of prayer. It also retains faith. And it signifies all kinds of professions, such as music, etc. If Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies the sound of singing, by which the dead are sometimes lamented, or which builders sing when they build buildings. And if Jupiter is conjoined with it, it signifies the sound of readings or songs, which the masters of sects use at altars and their places of prayer in praise of Almighty God. And if Mars, it signifies the sounds used by seculars, and the songs of the common people, in which there is mention of blasphemy or battles, or in which there is mention of prison or labor, similar to these, such as a song in which there is mention of capture and binding, beating with whips. If the Sun, it signifies the sound of wood, by which one sings before kings and nobles. If Mercury, the sound that is exercised in the composition of verses. And if the Moon, it signifies the songs of sailors on ships. And in terms of illnesses, it has cold and humid diseases, which occur specifically and often in the genital members. And in terms of substance, that which is acquired for beauty, such as women's ornaments and their clothes, pearls, and paintings. And in terms of the quality of the soul, sweetness and friendship and eating, and similar things, and desires for drinking, eating, and coitus. And in terms of sects, the worship of idols, those in which eating and drinking are especially practiced. And some have said that it signifies the hips, the spine of the back, and sperm. And others have said that it signifies fatness and flesh, kidneys, and the womb, matrix, belly, comb, and navel. And in terms of colors, it has whiteness, and in terms of tastes, oiliness. And the quantity of its orb is 7 degrees. And in terms of days, it has Friday, and in terms of nights, Tuesday night. And its Firdaria years are eight, its greater years 82, its greatest 151, its medium 45, and its lesser 8. Its strength in the regions of the circle is to the right of the east. And Messahala said that it signifies among the figures of men, a white man, tending towards blackness, of beautiful body and hair, having a round face, and having small cheeks, beautiful eyes, and the blackness of its eyes is more than it should be. And Dorotheus said: it signifies a man having a beautiful face, beautiful eyes and much hair, and more white tinged with redness, thick, showing benevolence. And in terms of parts, it has a part of desire, and it signifies friendship, play, and love, patience, conjunctions of males. And in terms of parts of the world, it has Albiget and Aliemen, the lands of the Arabs.

[Mercury's Influence and Significations]
Mercury is mixed, masculine, diurnal, and inclines by its nature to that with which it is conjoined among the planets and among the signs. And it is the significator of younger brothers, it signifies servants and the love of concubines, it also signifies divinity and the oracles of prophets and credulity and work and honor or prayer. If it is in its own nature and no planet is conjoined with it, it signifies earthly things and the increase of things by growth, and in terms of age, youth, and progress in it. In terms of works, works that generate knowledge, preaching and rhetoric, and negotiations and estimation and geometry, and the disposition of things and philosophy and auguries, proverbs and writing, the science of versifying, and especially the work of numbers. If Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies among the works of numbers, the work of measuring lands and inheritances and the number of buildings and looms. If Jupiter, it signifies the number of psalms and the number of divine books. If Mars, it signifies the number that is in the gifts of armies and fighters, and the number of blows, whips, and clubs. If the Sun, it signifies presiding over the number of kings, the substance of houses. If Venus, it signifies the number of strings, wood or lyres, the number of sounds and pipes. If the Moon, it signifies the number of dishes that are made for meals.

[Sun and Moon's Unique Qualities]
They differ in quality, like the Sun and Moon. (Each of the other remaining ones differs in the quality of its genesis, like the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon]
The Sun and the Moon. (Each of the other planets differs in the quality of its generation, as do the Sun and the Moon.)

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
Each of the other planets differs in the quality of the nativity, as do the Sun and Moon.

[Sun and Moon's Unique Qualities]
They differ in quality, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the other remaining ones differs in the quality of its generation, as do the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
The Sun and Moon. (Each of the other planets differs in the quality of its nativity, as do the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon]
and the Moon. (Each of the remaining ones differs in the quality of its generation, like the Sun and the Moon.)

[Sun and Moon's Quality of Generation]
The Sun and Moon differ in the quality of their generation. (Each of the other planets also differs in the quality of its generation, like the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon]
Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of its generation, such as the Sun and Moon.

[Sun and Moon's Natal Quality]
They differ in the quality of their birth, like the Sun and the Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of its birth, like the Sun and the Moon.)

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of the nativity, just like the Sun and the Moon.

[Ages of Man and Planetary Rulership]
They vehemently incite to Venusian allurements, so much so that at that time, burning with wretched desire and blinded by insane intemperance, they wander in error even with open eyes. Hence, from the end of 22 to the 41st year is the youthful age, that is, the age of youth, over which the Sun presides, and which, having cast off childish vanity, inconstancy, and vices, incites the mind to seriousness of actions, modesty of desires, and care for both family affairs and the estimation of honor. Afterwards, from the 41st to the 56th year, the virile age flourishes, that is, the age of virility, attributed to Mars, because it equally increases the cares and pains of mind and body, indeed now instilling a sense and thought of declining age, and urging one to laboriously accomplish some memorable undertaking before death. Then, from the 56th to the 68th year, the presbytic age extends, that is, the age of old age ascribed to Jupiter, who, having removed a laborious, turbulent, and perilous way of life, brings a more decent, dutiful, and peaceful way of life, which is full of counsel and consolation, but free from precipitation. Therefore, it makes one most studious of virtue, honor, and liberality with modesty and gravity. Hence, to the very end, what remains of life, all of it, the extreme, finished, and decrepit age, rightly occupies the properties attributed to Saturn. For then nature quickly fails, having lost the vigor of body and mind. The body is constricted by cold, deprived of nerves, dries up, and becomes languid for all desires and pleasures. The soul, however, is sad, miserable, exposed to offenses, morose in all things, because of the sluggishness of movements and strengths in that age. These are the properties of ages common to all humans, and for this reason, Ptolemy named them the proper natures of times considered in common and universally by nature. However, concerning the following three divisions of time, which Ptolemy called specific or particular, not because they are not general, I believe, and powerful, but because they are found to be peculiar and diverse in the particular nativities of humans, and because they cause that common nature of states, which we have just described, not to remain the same. The first is that which occurs through directions to the parts of the zodiac corresponding to the rays and bounds of the planets. The second is through years, months, and days from the changes of the signs, about which will be said in the fourth discourse. But concerning that division of times, which Ptolemy made last, through the ingress of the planets into the principal places of the nativity, the author, as far as I know, made no mention, unless we wish to understand it through annual conversions, or, as they call them, annual revolutions, which occur when the Sun returns to that point of the zodiac which it occupied at the time of birth. Let the diligent seek a fuller explanation of this passage from Ptolemy at the end of the Quadripartitum. It follows that Saturn signifies a melancholic temperament. He will produce this when he is the significator of both form and temperament. Ptolemy prescribes that the description of form and temperament should be taken universally from the ascendant and the parts succeeding it, and from the planets ruling the said place, and partly also from the place of the Moon in a similar manner. If, therefore, Saturn happens to rule in these places, he will produce a temperament and bodily form consistent with his nature. And if oriental, he will make them yellowish in color, fuller in body, with black hair, and somewhat bald, with large eyes, and of moderate stature, and finally with a more humid temperament.

[Eccentricity and Planetary Motion]
THIRD. For if it (the Sun) were to proceed everywhere uniformly, it would pass through equal halves of the zodiac in equal times, not unequal ones. The only cause of this diversity is that the Sun revolves in an eccentric orbit, whose center, as I said, is different from the center of the world. For if the Sun's deferent orbit were concentric with the world, then it would be cut into two equal hemicycles by the equinoctial, and therefore the Sun's constant, uniform, and regular motion would be measured in equal times. Since this does not happen, we must believe that the Sun is carried by its own motion in an eccentric orbit, elevated above the center of the world, and because of this, although it moves uniformly through its own orbits, it appears to us, who are fixed at the center of the universe, to make dissimilar and unequal progressions in the zodiac, appearing to pass through the apogees more slowly and the perigees more quickly. All these things are clearly illustrated in our grammatical figure, in which two lines intersecting at the center of the world, designated by the letter 'a', form equal angles, and therefore in the extreme periphery of the figure representing the zodiac, they receive two equal arcs, designated by the letters 'y' and 'd'. However, the arcs of the inner deferent corresponding to the same angles appear to be quite unequal and dissimilar. And the larger one is that which is designated by the letters 'e' and 't' around the apogee, because it is intercepted by lines extending further from the center of the earth; while the smaller one, which is marked by the letters 'i' and 'x' around the perigee, is enclosed by lines extending less far from the center. Furthermore, since the Sun, by its uniform motion, daily traverses equal spaces of its apogee, it follows that the larger arc of the apogee near the apogee, designated by the letters 'e' and 't', contains more diurnal courses than the arc near the perigee, designated by the letters 'i' and 'x'. To these equal and unequal arcs of the apogee, sustaining regular motion in equal and unequal times, correspond equal arcs of the zodiac, designated by the letters 'y' and 'd'. Therefore, the Sun, passing through the arc of the zodiac around the highest apogee, designated by the letters 'y' and 'd', will consume more days, and its course, having become slower, will appear to proceed more slowly than when it travels through the opposite and equal arc of the zodiac around the lowest apogee, designated by the letters 'q'. The same must be judged concerning the other wandering stars, namely, that the centers of their epicycles, carried uniformly in eccentrics, are carried unequally above the center of the earth, and thus appear to move more slowly around the highest apogees and to accelerate their course around the lowest ones, traversing unequal arcs of the zodiac in equal times. As for the motion of the stars in epicycles, it is sufficient here to observe that in the upper half of the small circles they progress through the consequent signs, and in the lower half of the same, they retrograde towards the antecedent signs. However, the Moon's motion in its epicycle follows not this, but the contrary path: for when it traverses the lower parts of the epicycle, it accelerates its course wonderfully through the consequent signs; but when it holds the highest parts, even if it seeks the antecedent signs, it never retrogrades quickly towards the antecedent signs due to the motion of the epicycle's center, but only becomes slow in its course. This is the rough theory of ascensions and descensions, progressions and retrogressions, which we must briefly and concisely touch upon as to how it is to be applied to the calculation of tables or rather Ephemerides. The arc of the zodiac calculated from the highest apogee of the eccentric to the center of the epicycle according to the order of the signs, in the theories of the planets and tables of motions, is called the 'equated anomaly of the eccentric', and commonly the 'true center of the planet'. How this center, which we say indicates the elongation of the epicycle's center from the highest apogee of the eccentric, is to be calculated from tables, has been amply indicated above, namely, by the subtraction of the apogee from the motion of longitude and the prosthaphaeresis of the eccentric. If you wish to calculate the same from the established motions of the common Ephemerides, proceed as follows: Extract the true motion of the planet from the ephemeris, and subtract from it the apogee, or as they call it, the 'auge' of the planet in the second signification, that is, the arc calculated from the vernal intersection to the highest apogee of the eccentric, and which is here ascribed by us to the planets in the tables, accommodating a whole revolution or twelve signs, as astronomical calculation requires, whenever subtraction cannot be performed: this done, the equated anomaly of the eccentric will remain, or as they call it, the true center, that is, the distance of the epicycle's center, or rather of the planet itself, from the highest apogee of its eccentric, for I have thought it safe here to neglect the difference between the true motion of the epicycle's center and the body of the planet. Furthermore, to return to the matter at hand, if that true anomaly of the eccentric is less than 180 parts or six signs, it will indicate the planet descending from the highest apogee of the eccentric; if greater, ascending from the lowest apogee to the highest. Finally, the number of parts 90 and 270 will show both mean longitudes, the former the first, the latter the second. APOGEES OF THE PLANETS. Planets, Signs, Parts: Saturn 8, 28; Jupiter 4, 6; Mars 6, 4; Sun 27, 3; Venus 2, 7; Mercury 6, 1; Moon 15, 28. The epoch of the apogees also, that is, the longitudes of the zodiac derived from the vernal intersection, and extending to the highest apogees of the stars, which we have added here, and which are established for the time of our example, that is, for the year of Christ our God 1527, can nevertheless be accommodated without error to the preceding or succeeding century in this practical calculation due to the very slow progression of the apogees. The perigees, however, are diametrically opposite to the places of the apogees, which is very useful for knowing the places where, by reason of their eccentrics, they recede furthest from the earth, or approach it most closely. For example, the Saturnian distance from the earth in our time is longest at 28 degrees of Sagittarius, and shortest at 28 degrees of Gemini. In the same way, one must judge concerning the distance or proximity of Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury. For the Moon's apogees are more unstable, and always traverse the zodiac in thirty days. The apogee, or its highest apogee, is with the Moon under the Sun at the beginning of the periodic month: on the seventh day, in the opposite parts of the Moon: on the fourteenth day, it is diametrically opposite to the Sun's parts with the Moon: on the 22nd day, it is again opposite the Moon: and then after almost every eight days, it is again conjoined with the Sun with the Moon. As for exploring the ascent and descent of planets in epicycles, it is easy for those who understand the calculation that supplies the places of the stars' longitude, which we discussed above, to judge this. For if the equated anomaly of the orbit, which they call the argument of the planet's equation, is less than 180 parts, it indicates the planet's descent from the summit of the epicycle to its perigee; if greater, it declares its ascent from the lower part of the epicycle to its highest point. For example, in our example, we found the equated anomaly above: Saturn indeed at 453.31 parts, Venus at 42.501 parts, and Mercury at 65.541 parts: which numbers indicate the descent of these three stars from the summits of their epicycles. On the contrary, Jupiter and Mars, since the equated anomaly of the former is 337.131 parts, and that of the latter is 183.91 parts, ascend to their apogees, having left the perigees of their epicycles. If you seek another and easier characteristic of this matter, the harmony of the stars, which they observe with respect to the Sun, will easily supply it to you. For the three superior planets, in conjunction with the Sun, and which is the same, around the mean directions, occupy the highest apogees of the epicycles: on the contrary, around the middle time of retrogradation, and diametrically opposite to the Sun, they hold the lowest apogee of the same epicycle. After conjunction, however, as the Sun recedes from them, they also begin to descend from the summit of the epicycle, and thereafter, descending, they observe such a proportion that they are always as many parts distant from the highest apogee of the epicycle as is the distance from the planet to the Sun. Therefore, the distance from the planet to the Sun according to the succession of the signs, which you can take from the ephemeris, will be able to inform you quite certainly of the elongation of the planet from the summit of the small circle. However, the case of the two inferior planets is different. For the stars of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars can be distant from the Sun by the space of three, four, and six signs, while Venus and Mercury can be distant by two. The superior planets begin to retrograde from their morning station, the inferior ones from their evening station. But the characteristic...

[Planetary Almugea]
This calculation, on June 4, 14:00, 1555, made the Moon's latitude ascending southern, when it was then northern and descending. Let us now discuss the planets' distance from each other, namely what happens to the five planets in relation to the luminaries: we will say from what Ptolemy said about Almugea, that is, about seeing each other face to face, that is, when it is between a planet and the Sun: while the planet is occidental, that is, while it follows the Sun as much as there is between the house of that planet and the house of the Sun in signs, or when it is between the planet itself and the Moon, when it is oriental from the Moon, that is, while it succeeds the Moon as much as there is between the house of the planet and the house of the Moon in signs, that is, when the planet is as distant from the Sun afterwards as its house is distant from the Sun's house. Similarly, it is said of the Moon: because when a planet has succeeded the Sun, it will be from the Sun, namely Saturn in the 6th sign; and Jupiter in the 5th, Mars in the 4th, Venus in the 3rd, Mercury in the 2nd, then it is said to be in the Almugea of the Sun. Similarly, when it is between each planet and the succeeding Moon, this number of signs of each planet is said to be in the Almugea of the Moon.

[Planetary Security (Ductoria)]
Regarding ductoria, that is, the security of a planet, namely: how it is safe from rays. From this, the ductoria of a planet, that is, for the planet to be in its haim, that is, in its own part, and in some angle of the ascendant: and some of the luminaries similarly in a place similar to it, in a quadrant, namely in some angle, so that the planet is oriental from the Sun by day: occidental from the Moon by night. And every planet is said to be in its ductoria according to some, when there are 60 degrees between the oriental planet and the Sun.

[Planetary Combustion and Union]
And every planet, from which it is covered by the Sun's rays until it appears from under the rays, is called combust: and when it begins to enter the rays, it is said to have begun to be combust: and when it is hidden under the rays and is near the Sun by 12 degrees, it is called oppressed: and when it is with the Sun in one degree, and there are 16 minutes or less between them, its latitude similarly, it is called united: when it has passed the same union seeking an exit, until it is seen, it is called escaped.

[Planetary Orientation and Opposition]
And from which the three higher planets appear from under the rays, they begin to rise, that is, to appear in the morning before the Sun, this is when they are closer to the circle of the eastern hemisphere, until they come to opposition, they are called oriental dextri: from which they have passed opposition until they conjunct the Sun again, they are called occidental sinistri.

[Venus and Mercury Retrograde]
But Venus and Mercury, from which either of them separates from the degrees of the Sun in the middle of its retrogradation, they appear until they are combust by the Sun in their direct motion, they are called oriental: and from which they separate from the Sun in the middle of their direct motion until they are again combust in their retrogradation, they are called occidental masculine when they are in their rising, that is, when they are oriental they are called dextri, and they are said to be in their setting, that is, when they are occidental, they are called sinistri, they are said to be feminine, then they are stronger.

[Aspects and Latitudes]
For example, if the Sun is at the beginning of Capricorn, with a southern descending latitude of 7 parts, and Venus is at the beginning of Cancer, having a northern ascending latitude of likewise 7 parts, Mars will be perfectly and equally opposed to Venus. However, stars distant by 180 parts of longitude, if they do not have contrary latitudes, that is, if one is not in the northern part while the other is in the southern part, are in a partile diameter of longitude and not of latitude or equality, even if they have equal and diverse latitudes, that is, one ascending and the other descending. Furthermore, the author seems to hint at the other corporeal conjunctions that Ptolemy contemplates with a single word, which younger astrologers observe: Trines, although they desire contrary, do not desire equal latitudes. Sextiles require neither equal nor contrary latitudes, but at least tending unequally to one side. Finally, quadrangular corporeal conjunctions admit none of these, but absolutely demand that both stars, or at least one of them, be in the Ecliptic, and entirely devoid of latitude. All these things are most easily understood from the speculation on aspects by Johannes Blanchinus, who, in a large circle inclined above the Ecliptic and passing through the body of a star, however much latitude it has, takes the intervals of radiations or aspects. Both poles of this circle exist in the circle of latitude described through the poles of the Ecliptic and the center of the star, and are distant from the poles of the Ecliptic by as much as the latitude of the star itself, or its distance from the Ecliptic. Since all great circles in the sphere intersect each other mutually in two parts, it is clear that for stars having any latitude, both quadrangles remain perpetually in the Ecliptic, as if they lacked latitude, while both trines and sextiles, along with the diameter, fall outside the Ecliptic not in one way, but variably. For if the latitude of the star is northern, both of its sextiles will remain in northern latitude, with the diameter and both triangles extending to the southern side. Conversely, if the latitude of the star is southern, both of its sextile aspects will also remain in the southern part of the world, with the opposition and its collateral triangles transmitted to the north: a summary of which we have provided for you in a grammatical form. We have also added numbers, which indicate the latitudes of trine and sextile radiations, which are derived from stars not less than eight parts distant from the Ecliptic. As in the example we just gave, Mars holding the beginning of Capricorn with a southern latitude of 7 parts leaves both sextiles in the south, distant from the Ecliptic by 3.29 1/2, 37 2/3 parts, with all other rays, except the squares, which fall exactly on the Ecliptic, cast to the north. And the latitude of the opposite radiation is as much as that of Mars itself, namely 7 parts north. The trines, however, are 3.29 1/2, 37 2/3 parts, also north, which the inscribed numbers show, and furthermore, they also show that trines and sextiles are almost as distant from the Ecliptic as half the latitude of the stars.

[Mutual Deflux and Application]
The DIFFERENCE is that in the 24th part it proceeds, in the 25th part it retrogrades. Here, they meet each other, and signify a duplication of effects, which usually occur through such an application. Mutual deflux, however, occurs when the planet that is in more parts is direct, and the one in fewer parts is retrograding, and it signifies the frustration of significations, as if Mars were in the 9th part of Taurus proceeding, and Venus in the 8th part of Taurus retrograding. These are the general modes of applications and defluxes, and they are obtained by division. For either both planets are found direct, or both retrograde; or finally, one of them is direct, and the other retrograde, and no more cases can be found, in all of which, as often as they are conjoined within the orb of light, they will make an application; but as often as they are conjoined before the lighter planets leave the orb of light of the heavier ones, they will make a separation or deflux, as we have said. In these conjunctions and all subsequent ones, you will be greatly helped in judging them most easily and briefly by a compendium that generally embraces all aspects of all planets, both to themselves and to the other parts of the figure, which you can describe for yourself in the nativities of individuals or the beginnings of other things in this way: Draw about thirteen lines in length, and in the spaces at the top, starting from Aries, describe the twelve signs of the zodiac. Then draw seven transversal lines to the previous ones, encompassing spaces for the number of the seven planets. Finally, in the first and uppermost space, depict the character of that planet which has completed fewer degrees of its sign, and this under the sign in which the planet of the fewest parts is found. The next space should be occupied by that planet which, after the first, has traversed fewer parts of its sign. By the same reasoning, the subsequent spaces are to be assigned to the remaining planets, so that the last space is allotted to the one who has traversed more parts of its sign than all the others. With these things thus arranged, if you have noted the epochs of each planet in the margin, and inscribed all the aspects on both sides of the planets in the appropriate sign spaces, you will obtain a perfect Astronomical Table of Rays. TABLE THREE. 335 TABLE OF PLANETARY ASPECTS, useful not only for judging applications and separations, but also for the deductions of Aphetic places, adapted to the example we have assumed. Mars/Taurus 27m+ X P. Sc. □* * toc * 10 |△ | 181 ΔΙ 12 * 18 14 10 18 541 * * & ΔΟ 2553 1542 カ * 14 80* hey *ΟΔ *04 △□* △0*1 8 ΔΟ* 26 42 gem 4027 12 D 27 52 * 28 21 ret. This table clearly shows all planetary aspects, applications, and defluxes. For planets distant by 60 parts in the Ecliptic see each other by a sextile, by 90 parts by a square, by 120 parts by a trine, by 180 parts by an opposition. If you do not find this exact number of parts, first look at Saturn, and consider which of the other planets, or if the aspect of any planet, precedes it, within the orbs of rays, noted above according to Ptolemy's opinion, or if the opinions of others delight you, within the half-orb, as they call it, for it is said to apply to the same. Similarly, if you find a planet or aspect following Saturn within the said limits, you will pronounce the same planet to be separating or defluxing from Saturn. In the proposed example, Venus applies to Saturn by a sinister sextile. And Jupiter, separating from Saturn by a dexter sextile, applies to the Moon by a trine and to the body of Mercury, etc. After Saturn is completed, the remaining heavier planets are to be similarly compared to the lighter ones. What we should attribute to the latitudes of the stars in judging aspects, we have discussed at length above. 336 DIFFERENCE. And when it is 2. Kenodromia, or the empty course of a planet, is when it is not mixed with other stars, etc., that is, when it is separated from the conjunction of any other, and is not joined to another by body or aspect, and as long as the planet is in the same sign, it is said to be empty in course, which is to be understood according to the orbs of rays, which we have just defined. This accident is observed especially in the Moon (an example is in Ptolemy, book 3, chapter on parents), and is almost neglected in others. For example, let the Moon be in conjunction with Jupiter, and after its separation from Jupiter, let there be no planet in Sagittarius to which it can be joined within the prescribed limits, nor any ray of anyone it can aspect; the Moon will be said to be empty in course until, having passed Sagittarius, it is joined to someone by body or aspect. And when it is, 3. A feral planet is named when it is alone in a sign, separated from the conjunction of others and from their aspecting rays, thus named from the likeness of a man alienated from society, or a wild beast living in solitude. In this way, the strength of planets becomes languid and is significantly weakened, especially if they are also peregrine at the same time. A planet is called peregrine when it is not in any of its essential dignities, as Saturn in the 6th part, because it has no dignity, it is considered peregrine. The difference between kenodromia and feralitas is that in the former, the star in the sign it traverses has a companion ray from which it separates; in the latter, however, it is deprived of all light from others. And when it separates, etc. 4. Translation of light or nature is what occurs when there are three planets, and the lightest is in the middle between the others and within the orbs: Then the lightest is said to transfer the light of the anterior to the subsequent: Therefore, the meaning of the author's words is, when the light planet separates from the heavy one and, before the complete separation, joins another by body or aspect: then that light planet transfers the light and nature of the first to the second: for example, let Jupiter be in the 4th part of Pisces, the Moon in the 15th part of Pisces, Mars in the 21st part of Leo. Here the Moon separates from Jupiter corporally, and before the complete separation, applying itself from a square to Mars, it transfers the light of Jupiter to him. For the light of Jupiter is 12 parts, and that of Mars is 7 parts, as we have placed above. Another example, let Venus be in the 8th part of Gemini, the Moon in the 10th part of Gemini, Jupiter in the 10th part of Pisces. Here Venus separates from the sextile aspect of Mercury, and is partially joined to Jupiter by a square, and transfers the light of Mercury to Jupiter himself. However, it does not prohibit Mercury from conjunction with Jupiter. For Gemini and Pisces are disjunct signs. I add this so that no one would think that the translation of light and the prohibition from aspect, which will be discussed later, do not differ. Another mode of translation of light, very similar to the former, follows. When, he says, a light planet joins a heavier one by any conjunction, and that heavier one in turn joins another still heavier one: then the middle one is said to transfer the nature of the lightest to the heaviest. Example, let Jupiter be in the 15th part of Leo, the Moon in the 14th part of Taurus, Saturn in the 16th part of Taurus. Here Jupiter, mixed with the Moon by a sextile aspect, makes Saturn partake of the nature of the Moon, although the Moon itself is plainly unconjoined with Saturn. Otherwise and better. When three planets are in one sign, if the heavier is in more parts, and the lighter in fewer, and not within the orbs, but the middle one is within the orb of application to the slower, and within the orb by which the lighter applies to it: then the middle one is said to transfer the power of the lighter to the slower: as if the Sun is in the 29th part of Leo, Jupiter in the 28th part of Leo, Saturn in the 18th part of Leo. Here Jupiter transfers power to Saturn. This is the general way of translations, which some moderns restrict to a few cases. For they call the translation of light and virtue to occur only when a light planet separates from a heavier one, and applies to another of the same quality: as if the Sun is in the 1st part of Aries, the Moon in the 1st part of Gemini, Mars in the 8th part of Gemini. In this case, the Moon, separating from the Sun, and applying to the body of Mars, transfers heat to Mars, who is also hot. For the Sun bestows its power, which the Moon received from it by aspect, to Mars. 6. Reddi.

[Calculating Conception Time and House Cusps]
However, the hour and remaining minutes of conception are inquired as follows: From the ascension of the climate, beginning from the start of Aries, of the place which the Moon held at the estimated time of birth, subtract the right ascension, beginning from Capricorn, of the Sun's place for the completed day of conception. For what remains, if converted into time, will show the hours and minutes of conception. Or, alternatively, enter with the Sun's place for the estimated time of conception into the table of houses for your climate under the title of the tenth house, and note the corresponding time in the margin. Then, similarly, by the motion of the estimated day of birth, extract the time from the same table under the title of the first house. Having done this, subtract the time from the time (assuming 24 hours if subtraction cannot be performed), and the hours and minutes of the true conception will remain, which are to be added to the previously found completed days. To the time thus formed, the true place is to be sought, which is judged to be the true degree of the rising cardinal point in the genesis according to this method. In our example, the lunar epoch's oblique ascension calculated from Aries is 341 degrees, 318 minutes. The Sun's true place at midday of the given day is found to be 28 degrees, 12 minutes of Leo, and the ascension of the same place, beginning from Capricorn, is 240 degrees, 231 minutes. Subtracting this from the oblique ascension of the Moon's place leaves 100 degrees, 4013 minutes, which is 6 hours, 43 minutes, 12 seconds. The same time is more easily collected from the table of houses constructed for latitude 41 degrees, thus: Hours, minutes, seconds. Time of Moon's birth under the title of the first house: 16. Time of Sun's conception under the title of the tenth house: 10. Post-meridian hours of conception: 6 hours, 45 minutes, 2 seconds, 43 minutes. Therefore, according to this calculation, conception occurred in the year of Christ 1526, on August 12, at 6 hours, 43 minutes, 1 second. At this time, the Moon's true place is 24 degrees, 101 minutes of Libra, and this is the same part of the sky horoscoping at the time of birth, explored by the balance of Hermes. How, once the horoscope or midheaven is known, the other cusps become known. If the midheaven is known, its right ascension and the oblique ascensions of the other cusps will not be hidden by what we said above in the first difference concerning the construction of the celestial domiciles. But if you have examined the horoscope, then from its ascension in the climate, subtract 90 degrees, accommodating a full revolution if necessary, and the ascension of the midheaven will remain. Knowing this, by continuous addition of 30 degrees, you inquire into the ascensions of the remaining five subsequent cusps, and for each ascension, you extract the corresponding degrees of the Ecliptic from the tables suitable for each cusp, as explained above. Furthermore, how, given the ascendant or midheaven, the other cusps are to be described from the table of the equation of houses, is sufficiently apparent from the table itself, which contains the position of the hemisphere on the sides of each cardinal point. All these things are clearer in themselves than to need elucidation by examples. Finally, you will investigate the time of true birth in this way: Find the oblique ascension of the ascendant degree, both estimated and corrected, and subtract the smaller from the larger. Convert the difference into time, and add it to the estimated time if the oblique ascension of the corrected horoscope was greater than that of the estimated one, that is, if the true birth preceded the estimated one, or subtract it if the opposite occurred. But if you use tables for equating houses, compare the time written in the table of equations next to the degree of the estimated midheaven with the time written in the same table next to the degree of the corrected midheaven, and subtract the smaller from the larger. Add the difference to the estimated time if the horoscoping degree at the estimated time preceded the true horoscope, or subtract it from the same if the opposite occurred, and the time of true birth will result. To this, if we also describe the motions of the stars with the nodes of the Moon and perhaps the parts of fortune, we will obtain a celestial figure complete in all respects. And from this, the Hylech, that is, the place of life in nativities, whose knowledge is such that you first look at the hour of birth. If it is in the day, you begin with the Sun: if it is within 5 degrees or less before the degree of the ascendant sign, or if it is in the 10th or 11th house, whether the sign is masculine or feminine, it will be suitable to be the Hylech. But if it is in these three places, namely in the 7th, 8th, or 9th house in a masculine sign, it will similarly be suitable to be the Hylech. If, however, it is in these three places in a feminine sign, it will not be suitable to be the Hylech. Next, you look at the Moon: if it is in the ascendant or in the 2nd or 3rd house, or in the 7th or 8th house, it will be suitable to be the Hylech, whether the sign is masculine or feminine. And if it is within 5 degrees or less before the degree of the ascendant sign: or if it is in the 10th or 11th house, or in the 4th or 5th house, or in the 7th house in a feminine sign, it will be suitable to be the Hylech. But if it is in any of these in a masculine sign, it will not be suitable to be the Hylech, if the birth was in the day. If, however, the birth was at night, we begin with the Moon: if it is in any of the aforementioned places, according to what we have said, it will be suitable to be the Hylech. But if the Moon is not in them, you then look at the Sun, which if it is within 5 degrees or less before the degree of the 7th house, or if it is in the 4th or 5th house, it will be suitable to be the Hylech, whether the sign is masculine or feminine. But if it is within 5 degrees or less before the ascendant: or in the ascendant, or in the second masculine sign, then it will also be suitable to be the Hylech. But if it is in any of these places in a feminine sign, it will not be suitable to be the Hylech. If neither of the luminaries is suitable to be the Hylech: Then look at the day of birth, whether it is conjunct or pre-conjunct, that is, whether it is after the conjunction or before the conjunction. If the birth was conjunct, and the degree of conjunction was in any of the angles: or in a succeeding angle: it will be in a suitable place for the Hylech. But if the aforementioned degree was falling from these eight places, i.e., from the angles and from the succeeding angles, it will not be the Hylech. Then you look at the degree of the Part of Fortune: if it is in any of the angles, or in the succeeding angles: it will be in a suitable place for the Hylech. But if it was falling from these eight places: you then look at the degree of the ascendant and establish it as the Hylech. If, however, the birth was pre-conjunct, you begin with the degree of the pre-conjunction, and you look at it as you did before with the degree of conjunction: and after it, the degree of the Part of Fortune: after it, the degree of the ascendant in the order we mentioned for the degree of conjunction. You will not care about the gender of the signs, i.e., you will not look whether those signs are masculine or feminine, except only in the luminaries, that is, in the degree of conjunction, or pre-conjunction and ascendant and Part of Fortune, you do not consider whether they are in masculine or feminine signs, both in the angles and in the succeeding angles: but these four will only be suitable to be the Hylech when they are in these eight places, that is, in the angles or their succedents: but if they are in receding places, that is, falling from the angles, they will not be suitable to be the Hylech. It appears therefore that the Sun is suitable to be the Hylech by day, and by night above the earth, and below the earth in 11 places, above the earth in 6 places and below the earth in 5. The Moon will also be suitable to be the Hylech by day, and by night above the earth, and below the earth similarly in 11 places, above the earth in 10 and below the earth in 6. And with

[Malefic Squares and Anareta]
squares into the beginning of Gemini: these square rays of the malefic can oppress the Apheta Sun, even if Saturn does not aspect it from the beginning. But the same condition is also required in the obedient, whom malefics rule like tyrants. Therefore, when the place of the Apheta obeys the place of the Anareta, then the Anareta, led to the Apheta, destroys it. But indeed, since bodies worn out by old age are easily dissipated by a slight cause, the antiscia of evils in the elderly can oppress the lord of life through itself without the aforementioned condition. Hence, the trines of malefics from short ascension signs, when afflicted, kill; and conversely, the corrupted sextiles from long ascension signs kill for the same reason. To easily discern these radiations, look at the aspecting place and the place into which the rays fall, and if the houses of these places aspect each other by a sextile, the nature of that ray will be sextile; and if the houses aspect each other by a square, the nature of the ray will be square; and if by a trine, a trine. Hence, the Imum Coeli always aspects the Ascendant by a square in equinoctial signs, as if Taurus, an equinoctial sign, is understood to be in the Imum Coeli when Gemini ascends, even though by zodiacal reckoning, the sign of Gemini is found there. Such squares also kill because signs aspecting each other by a square are universally of contrary nature. Finally, when one enters a moderate life, the place of the Sun also kills, namely, when oppressed by the conjunction of some malefic, it is helped or freed by no benefic. Therefore, since a malefic is the cause, so that a focus falling upon the Moon, being the Apheta, kills, it follows that if a benefic is placed in the place of the malefic with the Sun, it will by no means kill the place of the Sun. The Arabs add the sixth, seventh, and eighth cusps to the Anaretas we have enumerated, and the lords of those cusps. Similarly, also the fourth cusp, when it is found to be watery and unfortunate. Also dark places, nebulous places, places of Eclipses, places of Comets appearing at the time of birth, the Heart of Scorpio, the Heart of Leo, also the Moon, the part of Mars, the part of Azemena; finally, they say that the rays of Mercury also impede.

[Profections of the World's Years]
Regarding the profections of the world's years, whose epochs are taken from great conjunctions, we have deliberately omitted a broader and more detailed explanation. This is partly because the entire matter seems suspicious to us in general, and full of absurd errors for the reasons previously stated. It is also because it is inherently simple and sufficiently clear from what we have said about the profections of nativities, except that Alcabitius introduces some difficulty by adapting the profections of the world's years not to Solar years, but to Persian years.

[On the Direction of the Significator]
From this follows the atazir, that is, the direction: this means that you direct a certain significator to a certain place of the signs, and you know what is between them in degrees of direction, and you will take one year for each degree. Therefore, when you wish to know this, and that significator is in the ascendant, which you wish to direct to some part of the circle, subtract the ascensions of the degree in which the significator you wish to direct is, by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it: and what remains will be the degree of direction. But if the significator is in the degree of the seventh house: you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir, that is, the opposite of the degree in which the significator is, from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it in that region. But if the significator is in the Midheaven or in the Imum Coeli: you will subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it by the ascensions of the direct circle: and what remains will be the degree of direction.

[Significator Outside Angles]
If, however, the significator you wish to direct is in some place outside the four angles: you will look at its longitude from one of these angles, which are the angle of the Midheaven and the angle of the Imum Coeli: that is, you will look at the significator, and if it is between the ascendant and the Midheaven, you will subtract the ascensions of the degree of the Midheaven by the direct circle from the ascensions of the significator's degree. And if it is between the seventh house and the Midheaven: you will subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree from the ascensions of the Midheaven's degree by the direct circle: and what remains, from whichever of these places it may be, you will divide by the parts of the hours of that day of the degree in which the significator is: and what comes out will be the hours of longitude from the angle. And if it is between the ascendant and the Imum Coeli: you will subtract the ascensions of the significator's degree by the direct circle from the ascensions of the degree of the Imum Coeli. Again, if the significator is between the Imum Coeli and the seventh house: you will subtract the ascensions of the degree of the Imum Coeli by the direct circle from the ascensions of the significator's degree: and what remains from whichever of these places, you will divide by the time, that is, by the hours of the day of the nadir, that is, the opposite of the significator's degree: and what comes out will be the hours of longitude from the angle. When you have known the hours of longitude from the angle, and you wish to direct the significator to some place of the circle of signs: and the significator is in the middle of the eastern circle, which is from the Midheaven to the Imum Coeli, of those that succeed the ascendant: subtract the ascensions of that degree in which the significator is from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it by the direct circle: and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle: keep it. After this, you will subtract the ascensions of that degree in which the significator is by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of that degree to which you wish to direct it: and what remains will be the significator of the region: after this, look at the remainder, which is between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region, and you will take its sixth part, and multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle, and what results will be the equation: and if the significator of the direct circle is less than the significator of the region: add the equation to the significator of the direct circle. And if the significator of the direct circle is greater, subtract the equation from it: and what remains will be the degree of direction.

[Significator in Western Circle]
Likewise, if the significator you wish to direct is in the middle of the western circle: which is from the Imum Coeli to the Midheaven of what succeeds the seventh house: you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir of the significator's degree, which you wish to direct, from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it, by the direct circle: and what remains will be the significator of the direct circle. After this, you will subtract the ascensions of the nadir of the significator's degree by the ascensions of the region from the ascensions of the nadir of that degree to which you wish to direct it: and what remains will be the significator of the region: then you will take the remainder, which is between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region, and you will take its sixth part, and multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle: and what results will be the equation. After this, you will look at the significator of the direct circle, if it is less than the significator of the region, you will add the equation to the significator of the direct circle: and if the significator of the direct circle...

[Calculating Solar Arc to Setting]
The fourth part. 415. The diurnal temporal hours of the same are 18 parts, 27 scruples, 14 seconds. The setting, however, is distant from the midheaven by six temporal hours, which, when multiplied by the diurnal temporal hours of the Sun, produce 110 parts, 42 scruples, 14 seconds of temporal hours, by which the Sun's place is distant from the culmination when it sets. According to the first position, it was distant towards the same part of the times by 56 parts, 57 scruples, 14 seconds, which, when subtracted from the second distance, namely from 110 parts, 42 scruples, 14 seconds, leave 53 parts, 45 scruples, 18 seconds of time, during which the Sun, found above the earth, moves towards its setting. And in plainly the same times, the arc intercepted between the Sun's place and the setting descends almost, in the latitude of the place, 41 parts. Having thus calculated these, I consider the radiations falling between the Sun's place and the west, and I find them to be of the Moon, and Mars, the Sun, and Venus. None of these rays destroys the Apheta by its opposition, but some of them add strength to the Apheta, while others weaken it. Indeed, as much as the sextile of Venus adds, the square of the Moon seems to subtract. Again, as much as the opposition of Mars subtracts, the sextile of the Sun seems to add. But nevertheless, for this calculation to have a place in our example, let us suppose that only the diametral radiation of Mars remains below the earth, residing in 28 parts, 21 scruples, 1 second of Scorpio, which can subtract some years from the direction of the Apheta towards the western part. Therefore, to know how much it subtracts, take the nocturnal temporal parts of Mars's place residing in 28 parts, 21 scruples, 1 second of Scorpio, which under an elevation of the pole of 41 parts are 16 parts, 50 scruples, 14 seconds. Not, indeed, because the nativity is nocturnal do we take nocturnal temporal hours, but because the planet whose rays these are is below the earth. If it were above the earth, we would have to take diurnal temporal hours, even if the nativity were nocturnal. Having thus considered these, next inquire how many nocturnal hours Mars is distant from the west, and you will find almost exactly ten hours. Now proceed according to the rule of proportions in this manner: 12 hours subtract 16 parts, 50 scruples, 14 seconds; how much will 10 hours subtract? Multiply the second number by the third, that is, multiply 10 hours by 16 parts, 50 scruples, 14 seconds, and you will produce 62 parts, 48 scruples, 20 seconds, that is, 168 parts, 20 scruples, 14 seconds, which, divided by the first number, that is, by 12, yield approximately 14 parts, 2 scruples, 14 seconds, to be subtracted from 53 parts, 45 scruples, 14 seconds, by which the Sun moves towards its setting. 416. By which fact, there remain 39 parts, 43 scruples, 1 second of this direction. That this is Ptolemy's true opinion concerning this form of direction can be understood from his own words, which are found in the third Apotelesmatic, where, speaking of measuring the span of life, he wrote thus: "The destructive degrees in the moderation of life, which is perfected through the preceding signs, are none, except only the western limiting line, because it hides the lord of life. Moreover, the parts of the stars occurring in this manner, either corporeally or by aspect, only subtract or add years to those collected from the apheta up to its setting, and do not destroy, because these do not impinge upon the aphetic place, but rather that place moves into theirs. And the benefics add, but the malefics subtract. Mercury, again, as usual, adds strength to those with whom it is configured. The number of time to be added or subtracted is observed from the position of each part. For as many temporal hours as there are for each part, diurnal during the day, nocturnal during the night, so many years are signified, but in such a way that for those remaining at the rising, this entire number is preserved, and afterwards, according to the proportion of their departure from the rising, it is attenuated until it vanishes at the setting." Since we have reviewed the etymology, definition, and species of directions, and moreover, in an example, have made clear the treatment of the aphesis in the preceding signs, it remains for us to explain the methods by which the aphetic places are led through the consequent signs. The first and easiest is by the solid sphere, which you can see in treatises on the use of the solid sphere. The second is by an astrolabe or planisphere of great amplitude, where the outer limb is divided into 3600 parts. The third, and most exact, is that which the most learned man Johannes Regiomontanus expounded in his tables of directions and progressions. The fourth is the author's, derived from Ptolemy's opinion. The fifth and older method is proper to Ptolemy, which is easier and shorter than others: for everything can be accomplished by the Sun's tables of right ascensions and by the table of the quantity of days. And although most astrologers of our age approve the method of directing according to the doctrine and tables of Regiomontanus, nevertheless, for the reasons stated above when we were dealing with bodily conjunctions, Ptolemy's method satisfies us, and seems to agree more simply with his precepts of the art, and therefore with truth. For we could not find a single word in the Quadripartitum by which the most diligent and wisest of mortals, Ptolemy, could seem to us to have even insinuated that in the deductions of aphetic places, by which only the times of events are defined, the observation of deviations from the ecliptic is useful. Cardan also, a great master, preferred this ancient method of directing handed down by Ptolemy, and in his old age, almost disdaining and neglecting that exact method of Regiomontanus, which he had practiced in his youth, because of its extreme difficulty and labor. His words on this matter in his commentaries on Ptolemy's Book 3 are these: "The most exact method of directing is by the tables of Johannes de Regiomonte, who in our age undertook this most illustrious and difficult labor; but if the difficulty of execution brought equal utility to the labors, it would certainly be altogether preferable to use them." And a little further on, he prefers the use of suitable instruments to these tables. "Stars," he says, "are said to co-ascend whenever they are in the same semicircle of position; and if you wish to find this, it can be done by a planisphere, or even better by a solid sphere. I do not forbid you to do it by the tables of Johannes Monteregius, and they are more exact than instruments, unless the instruments are very large. However, the use of tables is very tedious, laborious, and prone to error, and especially because Monteregius did badly in this, 8.

[Planetary Position and Horary Times]
The diametrically opposite point is removed from the Midheaven, and the nocturnal hour below the earth is equal to the diurnal hour of the diametrically opposite point above the earth. Furthermore, how the horary times of the Sun and other places, both diurnal and nocturnal, can easily be found, has been abundantly demonstrated above at the end of the second difference in the chapter on hours. If you ever doubt whether a star is above or below the earth, or whether it is in the western or eastern half, you will most easily be certain of these occurrences from the points with which the star rises or descends, and with which it culminates. For if the point with which the star rises is in the eastern part, but has not yet risen, know that the star has not yet risen. Again, if the point with which the star descends is in the western part, but has not yet set, it is certain that the star has not yet set. Similarly, from the point with which the star culminates, we will deduce whether the star is in the eastern or western half: for if the point with which the star crosses the meridian is above the earth, but has not yet crossed the meridian, know that the star itself is in the eastern part. But if the same point is below the earth, but has not yet crossed the Imum Coeli, we will conclude that the star is also in the western half. In this way, from the position of the point with which the star rises, sets, and culminates, it is clearly deduced whether the star itself is above or below the earth, or occupies the eastern or western half, or finally falls on the ascendant/descendant or meridian. Finally, the said points, since they correspond to the ascensions and descensions of the stars, cannot be hidden. But there is still another and easier way to find the point with which a star sets. For if you add its diurnal arc to the oblique ascension of the star itself, the oblique ascension of the rising point will emerge while the star sets: once this is known, the point diametrically opposite to it, with which the proposed star must set, will by no means be hidden. With these preparations, bring the Apheta or significator, as if it were on the cusps, twice to the promittor. And first, by the ascensions or descensions of the sphere, you will collect the arc of direction, which the author here calls the significator of the direct circle. Secondly, by the ascensions or descensions of the climate, calculate the second arc of direction, which the author calls the significator of the region: having done this, subtract the smaller arc of direction from the larger, and divide the remainder by 6 (for one quadrant, as is clear from the above, contains 6 temporal hours), and multiply the resulting sixth part by the number of hours by which the Apheta or significator was previously calculated to be distant from the meridian: what is generated from this multiplication the author calls the equation, which is to be added to the direction of the sphere if the direction of the climate was smaller, or subtracted from it if the opposite occurred, for the remaining or composite number will show the sought-after times of direction. And one must work by ascensions when the Apheta is in the ascending half: but by descensions, or by the ascensions of opposite points, when the same significator holds the descending half. The sum of this passage is therefore: if the Apheta is above the earth, the difference of the right ascension from the Midheaven must be taken, and divided by the diurnal horary times: but if it is below the earth, the difference of the right ascension from the Imum Coeli must be taken, and divided by the nocturnal horary times of the Apheta, so that the temporal hours by which the Apheta is distant from the culmination of the heavens emerge. Therefore, if the Apheta is between the Midheaven and the Ascendant, the temporal hours of the subsequent distance will emerge: but if between the Midheaven and the western Cardine, of the preceding distance, similarly if the Apheta is between the horoscope and the Imum Coeli, the hours of the preceding distance will emerge, which is in all respects equal to the diurnal preceding distance of the opposite point in the upper hemisphere. Finally, if it is between the Imum Coeli and the western ascendant/descendant, the hours of the subsequent distance will emerge, and similarly in all respects equal to the subsequent distance in the upper hemisphere and in the diametrically opposite point, because opposite quadrants of the heavens correspond entirely to each other. Once such a distance is known, immediately the difference of the two directions, collected in the manner we have explained, by a double operation, namely of the sphere and of the climate, and thus collected, must be divided by six, so that the number of the προπαφαιρίσεως, that is, which is to be added to or subtracted from the direction of the sphere, emerges. An example of the significator in the ascending half, and in.

[Fifth Difference: Commemoration of All Parts]
FIFTH DIFFERENCE in the commemoration of all parts. And since we have completed the explanations of those things that follow from the names of the astrologers, let us now execute the commemoration of all parts. And when we have noted in the place of the parts: take from that place to that place, project this from the ascendant or from another place. We say that you add to that which was between both places the degrees of the ascendant, and project from the ascendant or from the beginning of the sign from which you project. An example of this is the operation of the Part of Fortune: because you take whatever is between the Sun and the Moon in degrees: you add to these the degrees of the ascendant sign: and what is collected, you project it from 30 to 30 degrees, and you begin to project from the beginning of the ascendant sign. Where the number ends, there is the Part of Fortune: and at night, conversely, from the Moon to the Sun: and you add the degrees above the ascendant sign, and project this from 30 to 30 degrees. Begin to project from the beginning of the ascendant sign. Let us begin here, therefore, after the Part of Fortune, the parts of the 12 houses, and let us begin from the ascendant. The First House is the Part of Life, and it is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn: and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Hyleg is taken from the degree of conjunction or prevention, which was before the nativity up to the degree of the Moon: and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Future Events, that is, the Part of the Sun, is taken by day from the Moon to the Sun: and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Love and Concord, that is, the Part of Venus: is taken by day from the Part of Fortune to the Part of Future Events: and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Stability and Trust of the duration of the native's ascendant, is like the Part of Concord and Love. The Part of Courage and Audacity, that is, the Part of Mars, is taken by day from Mars to the degree of the Part of Fortune and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Second House is the Part of Substance: and it is taken by day and night from the lord of the house of substance, to the degree and minute of the house of substance, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Poverty and Smallness of Ingenuity, that is, the Part of Mercury, is taken by day from the Part of Future Events to the Part of Fortune: and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Beatitude and Triumph and Victory, that is, the Part of Jupiter, is taken by day from the Part of Future Events to Jupiter, at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. The Third House is the Part of Brothers: and it is taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter: and at night conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of the Benevolence of Brothers is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn and at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant: but if Saturn is under the Sun's rays: it is taken by day from the Sun to Jupiter, and at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. The Fourth House is the Part of Fathers, it is taken by day from the Sun to Saturn: and at night conversely: and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of the Father's Death is taken by day from Saturn to Jupiter. And at night conversely: and it is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Years is taken by day from the lord of the house of the Sun to Saturn: and at night conversely: and it is projected from the ascendant. And if the Sun is in its own house, or in any of Saturn's houses: take by day from the Sun to Saturn: at night conversely, and project from the ascendant, and do not consider whether Saturn is visible or under the Sun's rays. The Part of Inheritances and Possessions is taken by day and night from Saturn to the Moon: and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of the Nobility of the Native, and of him about whom there is doubt, whether he is the son of that father to whom he is attributed, or of another: is taken by day from the degree of the Sun to the degree of its exaltation: and is projected from the ascendant. But if the Sun is in the degree of its exaltation by day, and the Moon at night in the degree of its exaltation, the part will be in the degree of the ascendant, and it will be the signification of the degree of the ascendant. The Part of the End of Things is taken by day and night from Saturn up to the lord of the house of conjunction, or prevention, and the degrees of the ascendant are added above it, and it is projected from the ascendant. The Fifth House is the Part of Children and is taken by day from Jupiter to Saturn, at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part which signifies the time, in which a child should be born, and their number, whether male or female, and what the woman will bear, is taken by day and night from Mars to Jupiter and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of the Knowledge of a Male and Female Child is taken by day and night from the Moon to Jupiter, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part by which the native, about whom the question is asked, is known, whether male or female, is taken by day from the lord of the house of the Moon to the Moon: and at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part signifying the child when Jupiter reaches it, that is, to the degree of the part signifying the child, is taken by day and night from Mars to Jupiter, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Love and Joy is taken by day and night from Venus to Saturn, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of the Knowledge of the Existence of Children is taken by day and night from the Moon to Venus, and is projected from the ascendant. The Sixth House is the Part of Infirmity and Azemena, that is, inseparable weakness of some member: it is taken by day from Saturn to Mars, at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Servants is taken by day from Mercury to the Moon, and at night conversely, and is projected from the ascendant. And Alendez said, it is taken by day from Mercury to the Part of Fortune: and at night conversely. And he said: it is necessary that we use both parts together. The Seventh House is the Part of the Betrothal of Men or Marriage: and it is taken by day and night from the Sun to Venus, and is projected from the ascendant. And this part is similar to the father of rumored commands. And the part of the betrothal of women or marriage according to Hermes is taken by day and night from Venus to Saturn, and is projected from the ascendant. And this part corresponds to the father of the cultivation of the earth. Likewise, the part of the betrothal of women according to Velius, is taken by day and night from the Sun to Mars, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Love and Pleasure is taken by day and night from Venus to the degree of the seventh, and is projected from the ascendant. The Part of Marriages is taken by day and night from Saturn to Venus, and is projected from the ascendant.

[Errata and Corrections]
f.61.v.34. accedentur. f.62.v.ult. under the sign of Libra for Venus, read Mars. fol. 66.v.19. Finally, the number. f.74.v.23. formerly from the adjunct, fol. 78.v.7. which dodecatemoria appellations from &c. f.76.v.34. gibbos. f.88.v.14. But especially. f.96.v.24. pleuritis anenteria. f.102.v.3. to behold, f. 110. l.7. horoscopon. f.111.v.18. for Cancer, read cuius: & v.28. & 19. read symphonia: & v. 30. possederint. f.112.v.8. emiserint: & v.11. attendas. f.118. ver. 22. kekentromenon: & v. 24. isoskellan & v.32. syzygian. f.120.l.1. isopleuron. f.121.l.6. horisonton. f.129.v.30. The place of Valladolid, whose longitude &c. f.131.l.15. ascensions of the obliques to the latitude. f.132.v.36. in the area of the table not exactly. f.33.v.32. calculu. f.134. The numbers of the deviations of the Planets from the Ecliptic are plainly corrupted: how they ought to be restored, you have on f.157. & 295. f. 135. in the scheme of equal houses next to the line of the western horizon, the character of Saturn is omitted: the same error is committed on f.139. in the author's figure. f.144.l.25. read Sexa. 3.2.1. Dies. scr. ra. 2.3. & v.33. for gr.2. read sc.2. & v.36. dies 51. read sc.45. f.157.l.5. Saturn's southern and descending from the northern limit of latitude. See f.295. f.164.l.31. improuidu. f.165.v.25. Cu aut. f.170.l.3. prosti. f.177. v.13. to their own proper orbs rather &c. f.191.l.14. estq; q &:l.33. among other planets. fol.193.v.ult. Cu ea quoq; quae de. fol.194.l.18. & 19. praefert positui: & v.penult. dele- &entur. f.206.v.7. Olenia, & seq. f.207.l.10. Venereis. f.230.l.28. nyktos nynos. f.231.verf.24. qualitates prima: & ve.33. pestiferis. f.234.v. 25. hosso an. f.240.v.14. succis: & v.25. haematites: & 31. ektron. fol.241.l.16. endynamon eno. f.246.l.19. exercitare. & v.28. corporisq;. f.250.v.ult. defluxib. f.251. V.10. febres. f.253.l.5. deniq; for diemque: & v.9. corup minoru. f.254.v. 16. & seq. akronykte: & v.19. Quin for Qui. f.267.v.25. horaru 8. read sc.5.l. fol. 295.l.30. for minor read maior. f.298.v.29. Cuius signa communia quaere. f.310.v.28. secundae for quinta. f.327.v.ult. mire. f.332.v.31. sunt, f. 336.v. 32. for Sol. read luna. f.356.v.7. progignosken: & v.9. stasis. f.358.v.16. & sequ. pomenian. f.359.l.14. reru. f.360.l.14. propior. f or. f.380.v.26. If indeed the degree of the Sun was hilech. f.381. for Almut read Almutes. f.393.v.9. pueniet. f.395.v. 4.12. pars. f.413.l.24. for ad horoscopum read, ad partem fortunarum aliasque fortes & retrocedentes planetas deducendos. f.431.v.7. delabens, & 8. for ascensions read descensiones. f.439.verf.7. part.10. scrup.17.l. hoc est, anni 10.&c.& verf.10. annos 23. fo.445.verf. 15. katalepsin, & verf. 28. signa. f.454.verf.9. from earth upwards. FINIS.

[Moon's Application to Planets]
The Moon applies to a planet when it is in the same sign as that planet, or in an adjacent sign, and is moving towards a conjunction, opposition, or square aspect with it. This application is considered stronger when the Moon is in a cardinal sign, and weaker in a fixed sign. The application is also stronger when the Moon is in a sign of its own nature, such as a watery sign for the Moon, or an airy sign for Jupiter. The application is further strengthened when the Moon is in a sign where it has dignity, such as exaltation or triplicity. Conversely, the application is weakened when the Moon is in a sign of its detriment or fall. The application is also considered stronger when the Moon is swift in motion, and weaker when it is slow. Finally, the application is stronger when the Moon is free from combustion, and weaker when it is combust.

[Dedication to the City Council of Cologne]
ENARRATIO ELEMENTORVM ASTROLOGIAE, IN WHICH, BESIDES ALCABITIUS, WHO PRODUCED THE ARABIC DOCTRINE IN A COMPENDIUM, AN EXPOSITION, AND A COLLATION WITH PTOLEMY'S PRINCIPLES, REJECTING FORTUNE-TELLING AND ABSURD AND COMMONLY ACCEPTED OPINIONS, THE TRUE ORIGIN AND USE OF THE ART'S PRECEPTS ARE SUFFICIENTLY DISCUSSED IN THE MOST CELEBRATED COLOGNE ACADEMY FOR STUDENTS OF PHILOSOPHY, PROPOSED BY VALENTINE NABOD, ORDINARY PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS TO THE MOST AMPLE SENATE OF COLOGNE. ART LOVES FORTUNE AND FORTUNE LOVES ART. ARNOLD BIRCKMAN COLOGNE, At the heirs of Arnold Birckmann. | M. D. LX. With the Grace and Privilege of His Imperial Majesty. Digitized by Google Digitized by Google: TO THE MOST SPLENDID AND ORNAMENTED MEN, SIR ARNOLD A SIEGEN, KNIGHT, SIR HERMANN SUDERMAN, SIR JOHN PIEL, SIR CONSTANTINE A LYSKIRCHEN, SIR GODFREY HITTORPFF, SIR PHILIP GEIL, OFTEN AND AGAIN CONSULS AND MOST VIGILANT RESPECTIVE PROVOSTS OF THE RENOWNED UNIVERSITY OF COLOGNE, AND TO THE MOST AMPLE SENATE OF THE SAME FLOURISHING REPUBLIC, HIS REVERED LORDS, VALENTINE NABOD OF SILESIA SENDS GREETINGS. I believe, most ample and most prudent men, that it has been rightly handed down by great men that among all living beings, only humans, divinely animated by divine minds, are placed in the middle of the universal globe, which is called earth, so that from there, turning their eyes to all things enclosed by the outermost boundaries of the world, they might recognize the wisdom and goodness of God through diligent scrutiny of the various natures that each part of the world contains, and might choose things useful for living rightly and blessedly. For nothing in the nature of things is so subtle or abject that it lacks innate powers and duties implanted by nature, which, when more deeply examined, not only confirm divine care for human affairs in the minds of the good, but also bring their own aids to life. What is commonly held as more vile than plants and roots of the earth? For they are so common and everywhere at hand that they are trampled underfoot even by those unwilling. But their virtue and the sympathy and reconciliation with our bodies, after being moderately known and cultivated by diligent and skilled men of nature, gave birth to the most beautiful and most useful art of healing for the human race, by which the fragile life and health of mortals are especially preserved: By its aid, in human bodies, the equitable temperament of humors suitable for life is preserved, and indeed atrocious and most severely raging diseases are so manifestly overcome that one should not be ashamed to believe that some herbs were divinely ordained and divinely shown to humans for nourishing and preserving certain body parts, and others for expelling certain diseases. Such and similar virtues are also inherent in all other things of nature, which if men could observe and understand more closely, they would undoubtedly approach a blessed life. And although far more natures are contained in individual parts of the world than can be comprehended by anyone's intellect as a whole, and confined to definite genera and forms, since men do not even perfectly grasp the entire power of one kind of thing: nevertheless, those very things that can be known by labor and diligence, and which have been comprehended by many brilliant minds and handed down by an artful method, open a great path to virtue and the recognition of divine goodness and wisdom, and have a manifest use in all of life. Monstrous men, who despise the arts discovered by our ancestors with admirable and truly divine ingenuity and handed down to posterity, and the study of further contemplating nature, insult God and harm human society.

[Astrology's Medical and Financial Utility]
If anyone thinks these things are too sublime, and disagrees with this opinion, let him know that astronomy contributes not a little, but indeed very much, to the medical art. Although physicians may primarily think these things refer to general circumstances and constitutions, such as in which places, Italy rather than Germany or Gaul, and for what condition of people, men more than women, or bilious more than phlegmatic, dangers of diseases are to be foreseen: they rarely apply them to singular and weaker causes, even though these are sufficiently effective in affecting bodies to which they properly adhere. However, since there is no difference between general and singular in terms of this power, they are rightly and usefully observed in the particular constitutions of each individual. For just as those who hide in subterranean places or apply other cooling things feel less the common heat of the Sun, so too it is doubtless that immoderate heats, which arise particularly in the bodies of individuals from each one's own cause, can be mitigated by contrary remedies. Finally, this diligence in removing bad natural effects of the heavens, to pass over in silence public and common afflictions, such as those derived from defects of the luminaries, also seems to have no small importance in avoiding and alleviating unexpected human misfortunes. For if a fall from a height, or danger from waters, or wounds are foreseen, by avoiding high places, contentions, ships, and rivers, we will be able to escape unharmed. As for wealth, glory, friends, and goods of this kind, although astrology itself is not a bestower, as Ptolemy rightly judges, nor is any other part of philosophy, yet since it teaches to foresee abundance or scarcity of future things, it can rightly be considered more useful and liberal than all others in economic and political matters for making profit: for in this matter, it requires much virtue of mind, but very little use of the body. Pliny writes that Democritus, who first understood and showed the connection of the heavens with the earth, when his wealthy citizens scorned this care, foresaw a scarcity of oil from the certain rising of the Pleiades in the future, and bought all the oil in the whole region at a low price, because of the hope of olives, to the astonishment of those who thought poverty and quiet were most dear to his studies. And when it appeared, a great cause of wealth flowed, and the anxious and eager repentance of the owners restored the price, content that he had thus proven that wealth would be easy for him (when he wished). Aristotle relates that Thales of Miletus gave a notable example of making money by the same reasoning, having foreseen an abundance of olives, whose words I have not been reluctant to transcribe here, so that his authority might add some weight to this commemoration. We must collect the reasons, recited here and there, by which some have made money: in this matter, we will be most useful to those who value and honor the method of making money. And of this kind is that of Thales of Miletus, which can be considered as a kind of invention for acquiring wealth. And although it is attributed to him alone for his supreme wisdom, it is nevertheless a general precept for making money. For when his poverty and the study of philosophy were objected to him as useless, and he himself had perceived from astrology the future abundance of olives, in winter, before they began to bloom, he is said to have bought all the olives in the Milesian and Chian territory at a low price, because no one then offered more, and at least by giving earnest money, since he did not have much money at hand: but when the time appeared, with many buyers suddenly converging, he sold them for as much as he wanted: and thus, having collected a large sum of money, he showed that philosophers can easily make money if they wish, but that their studies are not directed to that end. For so many and so great, and many other reasons, which it would be too long to pursue, since this science benefits men, and cannot be rightly reprehended by any means, as many have attempted, it is to be embraced with a grateful heart, and guarded as a gift of God not common. But someone may say: If the events of things are to be assigned to the eternal motion of the stars and an inviolable law, as you assert, then one of two absurdities, and a third with either, must be believed. For either chains must be placed on God, according to the opinion of the Stoics, which so connect him to the heavens and other inferior causes, that he cannot act freely or otherwise than as he is led by them: or certainly it must be established that God, after he once constituted and ordered the series of all natural causes, and attributed to them the perfect and supreme power of accomplishing all future outcomes, retired to perpetual leisure, just as an architect, having completed a ship, retires free from cares, and leaves it to be cared for and governed by sailors in the future, which is akin to the opinion of the Epicureans. Finally, if we accept either of these as true, a greater absurdity will be admitted, than if we believe that the stars in any way cause bad inclinations and vices in men, for we are absurdly compelled to say that God, who created the stars, is the cause of such evils. These things may seem plausible to the common and less cautious, but to those moderately trained, the defect of all parts is clear. And first, by the assiduous and necessary action of the stars, neither the freedom of God to act, nor the providence of God, which assiduously attends to created nature, is taken away, but rather both are affirmed, and confirmed in the minds of sound men, as can be sufficiently established from what the Physicists have handed down concerning necessity, and Ptolemy concerning divine and natural fate. Indeed, what can be pronounced concerning the eternal essence and virtues of God are altogether and absolutely, as they say, necessary, nor do they ever admit the implication of contradiction. For since God proceeds from himself and from no preceding cause, therefore he deserves to be called simply and without any imagination of contradiction omnipotent, intelligent, beneficent, just, freely acting, etc., through all eternity. But the condition of subsequent things, which have flowed from the first cause, and have at some time begun to exist, is different, far less constant, and finally the connection is weaker: for the power of acting inherent in all bodies of the world cannot be perpetual without God the creator and preserver of nature, nor can it ever interrupt the action once undertaken from itself. Celestial bodies, for example, just as they could not complete their periods at equal and constant times, nor observe eternal laws of motion, unless their power were always preserved intact and whole by divine power and goodness: so again, constantly circumducted by fatal necessity, they cannot inhibit or change their innate, or rather divinely implanted, course from themselves, nor according to the will of men or any other creature, but only by divine command. Thus, devouring fire retains its perpetual power of burning not from itself, but by the benefit of God.

[Dedication: The Divine Art of Celestial Observation]
DEDICATION. Those who condemn useful disciplines or mock them with foolish words, conversely, give due honor to God and assist the commonwealth in its proper place, who either learn useful disciplines themselves or ensure their propagation through others' generosity. But no part of erudition is more divine, nor more learned, nor more worthy of man, than a sober discussion of the heavens' revolutions and the effects of the stars. For since that exalted and most splendid, clear, illustrious, and star-filled celestial mass, which we observe to be equipped with such a variety of regular, certain, and ordered motions, is a divine and most ample work, as it were, a great book, in which God, the best and greatest, has expressed the traces of the greatness of His wisdom, and goodness, and His other innumerable virtues, and indeed, by that eternal motion of the celestial bodies, proceeding in an unchangeable order and law, as if with His own finger, He has described the future outcomes of all subject things, that is, regions, peoples, and cities, and indeed, of individual men, and the natural path of their fates, no discipline can truly be conceived as nobler, nor more admirable, nor more conducive to accumulating the goods of mind and body, than that which instructs us to read and understand this book of God. For since men, as Aristotle pleased, naturally desire the knowledge of things, what can be more desirable? What more suitable for acquiring tranquility of mind? What, finally, more convenient for fulfilling natural desire? Than the knowledge of this divine book, which embraces the causes of all natural events, by which we are made contemplators not only of present or near things, but also of the most remote and future, and of the most excellent things of all nature, that is, celestial and divine things. Moreover, the knowledge of numbers, geometry, and universal cosmography, the vehement study of the medical art, natural philosophy, and dialectic, and finally, the love of truth and the assiduity of labors, and many such things that this science contains, and without which it is never exercised with true praise and honor as if imperfect, have great importance for the illumination of the mind and the instruction in the knowledge of various things. What? That the studies of all virtues and arts can be better augmented and more rightly governed, with a foreknowledge of the natural inclination of genius, and the aptitude or inaptitude (or ἀδυναμία) implanted by the stars for managing affairs. For just as we see musicians to be inept, poets ungrateful, and soldiers unfortunate, who, with a natural inclination resisting, try to sing or versify or fight, and such things, which artists perform with great grace, sweetly and almost without labor, as if by natural instinct, laboriously imitate: so those who study philosophy, who study the art of healing, who study jurisprudence, and such faculties, if they are aided by the benefit of nature, will achieve all the main points of their art more easily and rightly and quickly, and will exercise them with greater dexterity, than those who, in a way, with nature resisting, strive for them with great diligence and for a long time. This, therefore, is what Horace prescribes: "You will say or do nothing against Minerva's will." And what the author of the Centiloquy prescribes, saying: "ἐπ τηδεία ψυχὴ πρὸς γνῶσιμ απλέομ ἐπιτυγχάνε το ἀληθῆς, ἢ ὁ ἄκρως ἀσκήσας τιὼ ἐπιςήμηp," that is, "a soul apt for knowledge attains more truth than one who has exercised himself excessively in science." These things, however, are to be understood in such a way that their place and praise are left to the arts and disciplines. For although nature is more powerful in most things, yet if it is not stimulated and strengthened by exercise and study, it will never alone produce a perfect habit of anything. And that doctrine contributes greatly to perfection, is clearly shown by the distinction that can be observed among ingenious people themselves: some of whom, who are governed by art, handle affairs aptly, clearly, and in a convenient order: while others, who are not restrained by the limits of precepts, following the affections of their own nature alone, are accustomed to often bring up irrelevant things, to distinguish related things, and to weave together things that are minimally coherent. For just as a diligently cultivated field, equally fertile as another, produces abundance, but neglect, besides a lack of good things, produces wild growth: so good talents are accustomed to excel through doctrine, and degenerate through negligence: and this is what the author of the Centiloquy teaches in another sentence, saying: "Gon Jυχή, inquit, συνεργεῖ τῇ ὀρανία ενεργεία απερ ὁ ἄρις Ο γεωργός συνεργεῖ τῇ φύαφτγῆς διὰ τ αροτριάσεως καὶ ανακαθάρσεως," that is, "a wise mind assists the celestial power, just as a good farmer assists the nature of the earth through plowing and clearing." It is therefore useful in some way to foresee happy or unhappy inclinations from the position of the heavens, so that it may be understood what each person can usefully and commendably achieve or not achieve in any profession, in acquiring honors, and in similar actions familiar to human nature. But also, we are greatly helped in this matter to avoid dangers, which often follow immoderate disturbances of the mind. For if someone has foreseen that impulses to furious anger, to inconstancy, to wandering lusts, and other vices forbidden by laws, arising from a bad mixture of celestial light, he will be able to avoid the penalties of laws and many severe evils, which sometimes those whom blind impulse leads with loose reins, as it is said, "ὃς ἐπιθυμία ήνιοχεῖ μαργοις χαλινοῖς," must incur, by sobriety, circumspection, by accustoming the heart to repress anger and to subdue desires. Therefore, the saying of the same author of the Centiloquy is worthy of praise: "δυναται ο ίπιςήμωμ πολλὰς ἀποτρέψαθαι ενεργείας την αςέρωμ, ὅτε ὀξιμ εἰδήμων ης φύσεως αὐτῆν, καὶ προπαρασκευάζει ἑαυτόμ πρὸ το συμπτώσεως τη ἀεργφών," that is: "He who is knowing can avert many effects of the stars, when he knows their nature, and prepares himself before their occurrence." And all these things that have been said about helping good inclinations and repressing bad ones, not only pertain to accumulating mental endowments, but also to preserving the goods of the body: and if they have somehow collapsed, how they ought to be recovered, they are very conducive. For there is no science other than this by which it can be better and more rightly understood what the constitution of each body is, and what the temperament of its qualities, and what things are most suitable to use to suppress the dyscrasia of the humors. As if, considering the position of the stars, it is found that an acute fever will arise from the vital part of the sky through the inauspicious radiation of Mars' transit, then by using colder foods and drinks for a longer time, we will be able to calm the western heat of Mars, if not abolish it entirely, at least for the most part: since nature is so constituted that humidity and burning force are minimally compatible, and do not remain in the same matter: So if Saturn is understood to bring illness to the body by exciting his nature, that is, cold and dry humors, we will try to temper that body with moistening and warming things. Hence the "ἰατρομαθηματικόμ στωτάξιωμ μέθοδο" was born among the Egyptians, who, as Ptolemy relates, when they had most increased the power of this art, were accustomed to everywhere combine astronomical previsions with the art of healing, so that from there they might hunt for the causes of present and future illnesses: and from here, taking remedies that are congruent or adverse to individual humors, they would remove present diseases with infallible remedies as much as possible, and avert future ones with "ταῖς προφυλακαῖσιμ" or, as they call them, preservative remedies. For unless the property of the surrounding sky and temperaments is entirely foreseen, they rightly believed that remedies often fail, since the same things are not suitable for all bodies and diseases. Nor did the father of medicine, Hippocrates, think differently about these disciplines. For in the book he inscribed "πολὶ ἀἐρωμύδάτων τόπων," when he considered the observation of changes, which arise from the "πρόδοις" (risings) and occurrences of the stars, necessary for a physician.

[Occasion for Writing]
The diction and context of the speech are barbarous, but the meaning and the matter itself, which alone we will always look for in this author, are better. Although, he says, there are not wanting those who have written introductions to Astrology, most of them have either not comprehended necessary matters, or have so obscured them by the prolixity of their discourse, that while they profit the unlearned reader nothing, they seem to have wasted all their labor; or finally, having no regard for order and method of teaching, they have confusedly heaped up precepts. For this reason, he says he was compelled to write a Methodical Introduction to Astrology, which should contain all necessary precepts, and in which nothing useless or superfluous or wrongly placed should be found. And so on.

[Divine Will and Astrological Necessity]
DEDICATION. It retains, and when applied to materials susceptible to penetration, it cannot but divinely suspend their necessary inflammation and dissipation. Similarly, all other things comprehended in the world, whether they are understood to be in the ether or in the elements, or whether one is compared to the other, can only be shown to cohere by this kind of physical, as they call it, bond of necessity. Thus, it is easy to understand that through the fatal, that is, as far as nature is concerned, necessary agreement of inferior matter with the motions of the heavens, the freedom of the divine will and its presence in all things are established and confirmed. Therefore, those who dream that either Stoic necessity is imposed on God by the decrees of the stars, or that eternal idleness is given to Him, greatly err. For the necessary commotion of the heavens, and the predictions of future events and actions, which are derived from the motion, position, and mutual connection of the stars, as if from powers divinely attributed to nature, are not simply asserted to be true, but insofar as God, the Lord of nature, does not oppose natural actions, just as the predictions of the art of healing are asserted to be true. For just as physicians, for example, observing a person subject to continuous defluxions, in whose body the lung, burdened with putrid humors and injured by an aposteme, like a perforated bellows, does not adequately supply the heart with copious and effective spirit, if they say that such a person will soon be subject to death due to increased heat and suppressed humidity, they do not deny God, the Lord of nature, His power and miraculous actions, by which He can, beyond and above the common course of nature, even restore life to the dead when He wills, let alone heal and preserve those afflicted by illness. EPISTLE: They do not deny, but rather demonstrate the effects and outcomes that will proximately follow from the naturally acting forces inherent in causes by God, and this with sufficient certainty, especially in this kind of disease, which has raged so much that it seemed worthy of being noted by the Poet thus: 'You see how the blood, released from the soft lung, leads with a certain limit to the Stygian waters.' In the same way, a prudent Mathematician, at the first rising of someone, observing Saturn passing through Libra, in which it especially rejoices, and occupying the seventh or sixth house of the heavens, which are conducive to health, and hostilely striking from a square aspect the body of the Moon traversing Cancer, if the Moon and Cancer, which are wonderfully reconciled to the brain and chest, are afflicted in this way, predicts an immoderate cold born in the brain, tightness of the chest, an abundance of noxious phlegm, and indeed, due to the weak heat and dryness of the star of Saturn descending to the lungs, ulceration of the lungs, difficulty in breathing, trembling of the heart, and finally, a fatal and lethal desiccation of the entire body. We must judge him to be expounding a series of naturally acting causes, and by no means infringing upon divine power, by which God, the Lord of created nature, can inhibit its actions, stop the course of the heavens, heal bodies subject to otherwise incurable vices and diseases, and do many other similar things. Through these, it is undoubtedly declared that most things in nature, which are necessary with respect to our spirits, if referred to the power of God, are truly contingent, and the effects decreed by the stars are by no means, as many have thought, sanctioned by such a necessary law that no other force can oppose them, but that they simply proceed to accomplish their primary intention and outcome. For besides the fact that God can command all subsequent causes, and can intensify, relax, or finally completely change or abolish their action at will, human foresight and diligence themselves, as I have said, can avoid or at least mitigate many great and serious calamities aroused by natural actions. Hence, experienced physicians, prudently distinguishing lethal diseases from curable ones, indeed impede and avert the procreating causes of the latter with natural and contrary remedies; but the former, when they see them arising from many, great, and insurmountable causes, they either leave to God to cure, or permit them to pass into the dissolution of the body to which they adhere. To this dissolution, not infrequently, even other lighter and curable diseases lead, when either their nature is not recognized by physicians, or the contrary force of remedies, when shown, is foolishly neglected; for then lighter evils, following their nature without any impediment, acquire strength and destroy. We ought to look for the same method and the same end in astrology, by the benefit of which not only the proximate causes of present diseases are shown, which is proper to physicians, but also the subsequent effects of superior and more powerful causes, which not infrequently suspend their actions for a long time, are defined. For if we have foreknown events that will arise from great, powerful, and many concurrent causes, and are therefore inevitable and completely unsubmissive to any things of contrary forces, then, as if deserted by the nature of things, we will flee to the invocation of God and pray that He, since He sits above the whole nature of things and above the stars, is bound by no bond of necessity, and is accustomed to bring help to those who invoke Him, even those already rejected by the rest of nature, may deign to benignly remove or at least mitigate our calamities. But as for other less effective causes, since they also, if unknown or neglected, bring about the necessary intentions of their nature, if we strive to avert them, when foreseen, with opposing remedies having a contrary force, we will avoid many calamities, and we will make many evils, which if left to their nature would be intolerable, to be borne and overcome. Since we have sufficiently shown that this diligence is useful and almost necessary for both body and mind, it remains for us to absolve God, the creator and constant ruler of nature and the stars, which, besides the seeds of virtues, we have said also engender the flames of more serious vices in humans, from all contagion and pollution. Many good men ask how it can be that if vicious inclinations or crimes arise from the stars, God is not the cause of human transgressions? For since God is the fount of goodness, and made the stars very good, and ordained them for one perpetual and constant effectuation of good things, how can it be that the cause of evil inclinations naturally descends from heaven? I think that in turn, it should be asked of them, since nature tends to one and the same and unchangeable mode of action, how it can be that wine, one and the same in substance and quality, drunk by many at one and the same time and in equal, but nevertheless somewhat immoderate measure, produces in some joy and hilarity, in others sadness and melancholy, in others fury, a desire to quarrel and fight, and finally in others laziness and profound sleep? Here I think they will immediately answer that the cause of the diversity of such actions is not to be sought in the active virtue of the wine, but in the subjects permeated by the pure wine. For since men rarely agree in temperament, and the very crasis, once it has assumed its qualities at the beginning according to the surrounding heaven, never changes into another state, and whatever is added to the body in subsequent times for the sake of nourishment and augmentation, it so reconciles and tempers to itself that it passes into that first peculiar state of its own, sanctioned by heaven before; therefore, what is surprising? The abundance of temperaments, wonderfully increased by the easily alterable wine assimilated to them, has indeed produced the well-known verse: 'The blood-filled temperament is mixed with wine,' declaring with excellent clarity the effects congruent with each nature: the sanguine producing hilarity, the bilious quarrels, the melancholic tears, and finally the phlegmatic sleepiness and such effects. Well, now they certainly fall in line with our opinion. For what difference does it make, I ask, as far as distinguishing these natural actions is concerned, whether there are two subjects, or indeed 72?

[Author's Intention]
In all arts there are two kinds of teaching. One they call 'Toli', by which we show a thing most simply and in plain words, without any mention of causes. The other, 'Si ou', which by accurate disputation investigates the causes of the precepts. Just as when in the art of healing, abstinence from wine is prescribed for those with fever, it is a precept of the first kind: but when the reason is added, that the drinking of wine increases the inflammation of bilious matter, it pertains to the latter kind. In the same way, when in the Spherical Elements the zodiac is defined as a great circle, cutting the equinoctial circle at oblique angles, so that its middle part, which they call the ecliptic, recedes from the same equinoctial by a maximum distance of about 32 parts, under which all the planets move by their proper motions from west to east: such a simple and bare description of the zodiac refers to the 'Toli' genus of teaching. But when practitioners, by more accurate disputation, give the causes of its obliquity, namely that it is necessary that such an obliquity of the zodiac be believed, because experience and many consenting observations have found and explored that the sun never declines from the equinoctial circle by more than 32 parts: and that this was so ordained by God, the author of nature, so that the sun with the other wanderers, for the life of living beings and other nascent things, might wander to the sides of the world, and not, if they were perpetually carried around under only one parallel by the conversion of the first motion, leave the middle earth scorched by the excessive heat of direct rays, and the other parts also barren and perpetually rigid with ice: they differ in the genus of teaching: for they endeavor not only to simply describe the zodiac, but also to show the cause of its obliquity. Thus in introductory books of Astrology, when, for example, the simple distribution of the zodiac into 12 signs is taught, with the causes concealed: it is 'Toli' doctrine. But through the 'Tudi ok' doctrine, the reasons and causes of such a distribution are more diligently sought, namely that the zodiac was first divided by the ancients into twelve parts, neither more nor fewer, because in the annual space, the moon, having completed its period, overtakes the sun twelve times, and is conjoined with it once in each of the twelve parts of the sky: or because out of 48 celestial images to be explained hereafter, only twelve fall into the path of the sun. From these it can be understood that the scope of this work and the entire intention of the author is, by the 'Tõ õlu' genus of teaching, omitting accurate disputation about the causes of the precepts, and neglecting the refutation of inept discourses by which some think this whole philosophy can be undermined, to simply expound the bare precepts of Astrology, as is customary and ought to be done in introductory books. For the 'rõ diõli' of astrological precepts, and the fortification and defense of the entire art against rivals, he says, have been sufficiently expounded in Ptolemy's Quadripartite Construction, and in certain works written by himself, of which I have not yet had the opportunity to see a copy.

[Human Nature and Celestial Influence]
But does it not happen that what was once a primary and most excellent form, having been abolished, assumes a far worse condition? It must be admitted, however, that such a condition is inherent in human nature: for man, having received from the Creator an immortal body and a soul full of divine light, through disobedience was not only stripped of his pristine perfection, but also miserably wounded and infused with poison, and made subject to death, than which nothing is more terrible. Since these things are so, if the heavens sometimes generate evil inclinations in men, we ought to attribute this evil not to the stars, which in the sound and uncorrupted nature of man could have produced nothing but what is good, but to the depraved nature of men due to great wickedness. This can easily be shown to happen not only in the stars but also in innumerable other things. Wine, than which nothing is better for nourishing strong bodies and for increasing and preserving innate heat, is destructive to those suffering from violent fevers; but this is not due to its nature, which is good, and, as I said, a friend to good health, but because, when added to foul matter inflamed by preternatural heat due to putrefaction, its own useful heat increases the conflagration. And hemlock, which in a vitiated and insufficiently warm nature kills by coagulating the blood with intense cold, could have been, in an integral nature uncontaminated by any defect, no less suitable as food than lettuces are now suitable for our bodies. Therefore, just as we see gold and silver purified and strengthened by a stronger fire, while other metals are consumed and dissipated, for no other reason than that the former are perfect and the latter imperfect, impure, as it were, diseased bodies: so it is fitting to think and believe that the natural action of the stars, in the untainted and pure matter of our bodies and souls, would undoubtedly produce all good effects, and that they inflict evil impulses, sometimes perverse inclinations, diseases, brevity of life, and such plagues, for no other reason than the impurities and defilement of our nature. I have discussed these matters at greater length and with a coarser Minerva, so that it might be easily understood by all that this part of philosophy, which they call divinatory, is not, as is commonly supposed, a superfluous and curious investigation of vain or illicit things, but a certain physical or natural treatise, in which the more potent effects in the elements, the crases or temperaments of mixed bodies are indicated, and referred to celestial causes, just as physicians are accustomed to consider the same things, except that they, content with particular bodily constitutions and more proximate causes, that is, those inherent in the matter itself, often neglect the more potent celestial causes. But indeed, it has been abundantly said above that both proximate and remote true causes are everywhere usefully observed. There are great books of childish and ridiculous accusations collected by Pico and others in reprehension of this science, to which some, either from slowness or malice of nature, so applaud that they think that from this, besides the utility of predictions, the whole action of the heavens and the comprehension of the whole art can be shaken as impossible. Here they achieve so little and are so inept, that it is no fault to pass over in silence and safely despise all those things which they ignorantly conceive and object to the subversion of the energy of the heavens and the comprehension of the whole science, since they can scarcely be admitted without fault to a discussion of serious matters. For those who sophistically or petulantly contradict either the immovable principles of the arts or manifest experience, are rightly judged unworthy with whom good and truth-loving men should have dealings. For it is not consistent that, while the small and fragile bodies of this sublunar world are universally endowed with certain powers and actions by the benefit of God, those vast bodies full of celestial light should lack powers or be idle. And besides, Ptolemy and Aristotle have sufficiently demonstrated that celestial bodies are the universal causes of the changes and motions that occur in the mass of the elements; the coarser and more evident effects of celestial light in the elements and in the bodies of animals and plants also fall within the common senses. For who is there who does not observe that the Sun, besides the four seasons of the year, also brings about a manifest difference of dryness, heat, humidity, and coldness by its daily revolution: and that according to the Moon's relation to the Sun, humors in growing things increase and decrease. The life of farmers, fishermen, and shepherds is rude and without letters, yet a more ingenious observation of the actions of nature appears in them than in some who have grown old in letters and are puffed up with a false persuasion of philosophical knowledge. For they know that when the Moon is waxing, shells should be sought full of juice, but when it is waning, matter should be yielded that is dry and therefore least susceptible to worm corrosion; and with similar diligence, taught by use and daily experience, they observe and adapt to the Moon's motion the more suitable times for sowing, planting, admitting cattle to mating, incubating domestic birds, and similar rural operations. But these excellent interpreters of nature are not ashamed to declare that they perceive no significant effect of the luminaries or other stars, and that there is no action of the stars. Those also, who, conceding the action and influx of the stars on the adjacent matter of the earth, deny that there is an art or science by which the times of future effects can be defined, although they might seem saner, we nevertheless think they need some instruction in the same school of farmers, or rather of sailors, who from the Moon's ascent to the zenith or the highest point of the sky, readily foreknow the access of marine waters, and through the same Moon's descent from the meridional circle to the cardinal points, the reciprocation of those waters and their reflux to the ocean, and know how to predict them to others with precision, although they are rude in calculations, and those marine tides, due to the more rapid disjunction of the luminaries, do not observe fixed times. But if these rural matters still seem too subtle and incomprehensible to anyone, I do not see why he should not be instructed by the school or examples of brute animals. For some animals are known to habitually observe and presage the more significant effects of the heavens. Hence the wisest poet Hesiod, the ant, because it is a small creature

[Division of the Work and Order of Teaching]
And the division in all things, and especially in handing down arts, is most necessary: for it brings light to things, and wonderfully aids memory, so that without it hardly any understanding or memory can exist. Order, moreover, is the arrangement of many conclusions, which constitute a certain discipline, in suitable and appropriate places. For since that from which a discipline is composed is manifold, order is necessary, otherwise confusion results, so that young people, because of the difficulty, become disgusted with the art, or at least are led to its knowledge later. Therefore, the author rightly, before the exposition of the precepts, indicates the order he will follow in expounding them. Furthermore, it is easy to judge how much the author's order differs from or agrees with Ptolemy's order.

[The Wisdom of Nature and Astrology]
This little creature adapts its operations to the change of lunar splendor by a wonderful natural instinct, the same, that is, to name the knowing, and to mark it with this bare epithet. And it is commonly known that many kinds of birds sense changes in the weather, and because of this, before winter, they fly in flocks to warmer places, and when spring approaches, they return for nesting. Now, if brute animals and uneducated men, ignorant of the powers of the stars and the places in the heavens where they are, can foresee and observe more significant effects proceeding from more efficacious causes, it is an injustice to deny the same sagacity to artists, and madness not to attribute greater skill and dexterity in judgment. Therefore, it is manifest from what we have briefly said that studious and skilled men, who, instructed in the philosophy of natural things, have learned to deduce consequent effects from antecedent causes, and moreover have a thorough understanding of the nature of celestial places and stars, and finally are so instructed in calculation that they can infallibly place before their eyes the position of the entire heaven at any given time and the certain epochs of the stars, can judge and predict, by physical consideration, without entering into any futility of opinions, the proper state of the air surrounding us, and the proper temperatures of mixed bodies, and what follows from these in natural order. But it has been shown that the doctrine of previsions is felicitous, admirable, a demonstration of divinity, and useful both in political and economic matters, and indeed for acquiring, preserving, and increasing private goods of all kinds. Therefore, it seemed to me not undeservedly most worthy that, freed as much as possible from the sorceries and other innumerable trivialities with which it is commonly overwhelmed, insofar as it agrees with natural actions, to use Ptolemy's word, "according to fitting philosophy," I should propose it to liberal minds for observation and study. And since it is the most excellent of all, and lies buried under the calumnies of so many sycophants, I commend it to men outstanding in wisdom and authority, and to the guardians of the liberal sciences, especially since this argument is by no means alien to the Mathematics, which you wished me to publicly illustrate in your most celebrated Republic's Academy, with the proposal of an honorable annual stipend from the public treasury. And no one will easily deny that the artful method of previsions, by which more important and serious unforeseen events are commonly foreseen, is most fitting for the providers of great things. But since in the doctrine of numbers, figures, and celestial motions, and in all other disciplines, we are accustomed, by what I believe to be a good and useful custom of the schools, to propose the very beginnings of precepts to youth, so that from there there may be easier access to more subtle discussions of things, therefore, desiring to promote and adorn this part of Physics as well, we have endeavored, explaining Alcabitius's Isagoge (because we knew that nothing in this genre had been produced more correctly by others), to discuss all the precepts that seemed necessary for acquiring and practicing the true art, not so artfully and perspicuously, but, as it is said, with a coarser Minerva. This writer is an Arab, and his interpreter a Spaniard, whose language, even if it is not so polished as to delight the learned, yet since it easily surpasses the others who formerly translated Arabic writings into Latin, I thought his zeal should be tolerated and taken in good part. Moreover, since this instruction could not only instruct the reader to understand Ptolemy, but also and especially the doctrine of all Arabs, it was necessary to introduce empty lots, decanates, novenaries, duodenaries, serdaries, and such things dissenting from physical doctrine, and not even approved by him, along with the true ones. But we, who have been concerned not so much with many writers of this kind as with a diligent investigation of the true and natural art, having cursorily viewed and then rejected these similar things that deviate from the goals of true art, have sought nothing but a clear explanation of the precepts of sincere art and a comparison everywhere with Ptolemy's opinion. But as for the other idle and empty opinions, even if we have often shown that they should be cut off as alien to the art, nevertheless, since we well understood that the writings of others should be emitted intact, we did not cast them out, and we thought that they too could or should exist usefully for economy or be seen by the incautious, so that from them the true may be more easily distinguished from the false, the physical from the vain, and what Ptolemy calls "number, lot, and the inexplicable" may be better understood. For just as in all other disciplines, for the sake of sharpening and strengthening judgment, it is useful to compare one or another of the more important writers, so we believe that this comparison of the Arabs with Ptolemy's doctrine can also bring some acuteness to young people. It seemed easier to write a new work of this kind, but it is more useful to adapt the first institution to the common treatment of Greek materials. And although these things, which I have added here for the sake of helping the studies of youth, I acknowledge are by no means so polished that they could be committed to the censure and judgment of the multitude without any fear: nevertheless, since the most excellent bookseller, Arnold Birckman, a most honorable citizen of your republic, with the excellent old man Master Conrad Tegemann, Canon of St. Ursula, whom, besides his remarkable knowledge of sacred literature, I found to be not only not ignorant of Mathematics and all this philosophy, but also conscious of many other admirable actions of nature, with other most studious and by no means common men of nature, did not cease to exhort me that they should be published in print, I did not think I should resist them in a matter which I could not have denied in any way even to Antonio Rinco alone, a man eminent by name of nobility and lineage, and besides being intensely studious of the most beautiful virtues and best arts, with whom I so long sojourned. From him I have often, and you especially, when the satiety of other business seizes us somewhere, conversing about the heavens, about the stars, and other admirable things of nature, understood that it was most troublesome to him that the most excellent art of astrology had no sincere, but either obscure or vainly filled, treatment of principles: by which he seemed to me to signify how much good judgment he possessed and how desirous he was of solid virtue. It is a great thing, a lineage from ancestors, but a greater praise to adorn the splendor of one's birth with excellent doctrine, whose impetus, even if it is from heaven, as I said, since it is known that both bodies and minds are propagated from parents in offspring by some similarity, therefore I have sometimes congratulated his father, John Rinco, a most distinguished man (who both derives his origin from an ancient and most noble family, and because of the wonderful dexterity of his genius, with which he cultivated liberal studies from an early age, has long borne the insignia of Doctor of both laws, not for the sake of any gain, but at least that he might be an ornament to the city and the Academy, in which he shines in a wonderful way, since I saw him now old and in advanced age, in which however he is in firm health and maintains military vigor, greatly loving and cultivating all good arts and uniquely admiring the most excellent things in nature) not without gratitude for an heir who can resemble not only his father's noble family but also his father in virtue. Therefore, I hope that skilled and candid readers will take it in good part that I, in treating a most noble subject, have complied with most noble men and friends who were my authors, that to the most beautiful doctrine of the motions of celestial bodies, which is constructed from certain and perpetually established demonstrations of numbers and geometry, I should add the immediately following part of physics, in which the powers, actions, and effects of the stars of heaven are explained by an admirable and undoubtedly divinely shown reason, and that I should publish these things concerning the first principles of the art, now collected by me for the benefit of youth. But your prudence, most ample and splendid men, which in the selection of persons

[Conjunction Aspect]
And if two planets are in one sign, they are said to be conjoined.

[Dedication to the Republic]
DEDICATION. ...to the most beautiful image of the blessed Republic, which you are very capable of expressing, I have decided to dedicate this work of mine, both for other reasons and especially for the remarkable generosity which I have experienced from you in the past and continue to experience, since whatever burden or duty I bear and sustain in your most celebrated Academy, according to my humble ability. Nor indeed was I afraid that this willingness of mine to please would not seem suitable or pleasing enough to you, since we all see that you, occupied with the greatest and most difficult matters of the Curia, seriously inspect literary matters, and augment the celebrity of the Academy with suitable persons and scholars for all philosophy, and for as many languages as are publicly exercised, and finally for all other faculties: and for this reason we are led to the opinion and confidence that it is impossible for you to judge the acceptance of those arts unworthy by your authority, whose assiduous practice in the city you believe contributes greatly to the admiration of the Republic. Hence it is fitting for us to estimate the loftiness of your minds and the depth of your counsels. For by thus providing for the Republic, you show not only that you understand that it pertains to the duty of governors both to defend the bodies of citizens and to imbue and instruct their minds with the best disciplines, but you also declare it clearly by your actions. For sailors can scarcely save ships caught in a whirlpool or long vexed by ocean waves: But you, in the space of a war raging like a fiery fury throughout Europe, in which we have seen the homes of many either devastated or burned, have been able to preserve your city and citizens unharmed. And about three years ago, in a time of great scarcity, when a long famine afflicted neighboring places, we ourselves saw that the grain exported from your granaries sufficed for your citizens, and saved many of your neighbors who would have perished from hunger. Such and similar deeds, remarkably performed daily in the Republic, even if they bring you exceptional and greatest praise, are nevertheless contained by the celebration of all men. But the benefits which you transmit through the preservation of the Academy to citizens, to neighbors, and finally to regions everywhere surrounding, are difficult to conceive entirely in the mind, and certainly cannot be sufficiently praised by any speech. Concerning these great virtues, to which all who sit at the helm should be seriously invited and diligently exhorted, I only admonish you who already possess these parts, that you strive to retain them intact hereafter. I also pass over the generous rewards by which, so that the University may always deservedly be called the guardian of all arts, you seriously restore collapsed professional positions, as can be sufficiently confirmed by my own example. For as I was passing through here, when I saw the form of the school, and heard all parts of erudition, except for the mathematical disciplines, which in most schools either negligence or the superfluous care of philosophers disputing about trifles had extinguished, beautifully sounding, I began here to expound the beginnings of these arts, which the school seemed to lack, for the sake of studious youth, and at the same time I signified that my labor, if it were judged useful to the school by you, would not be wanting. As soon as you rightly understood this, not only was a position in the school, with an annual salary, assigned to me by you, but also a most honorable gift was bestowed for the burden which I had voluntarily undertaken in the school for a time: for which I now thank you, whenever an opportunity arises, and at the same time I ask that you be pleased to commend me and my studies to you hereafter. But now I will end the letter with such a clause: If some governors, by the mere defense of the walls, the city, and the citizens, have been able to acquire the favor of many and the praise of extraordinary virtues, it is not easy to say how much favor, gratitude, and praise your citizens owe to you, who maintain a most peaceful city among quiet republics, and foster the only alumna of German academies among German academies. Farewell happily. Given in your republic, in the year of the saving birth 1560, at the vernal equinox of July and August CAESARS, that is, on the 25th day of March, on which CHRIST GOD in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, born of the royal lineage of David, assumed human nature. Errata. In the fourth verse, read ardentem for occidentem. Also read priusque for priusquam. Also read τρόποι for Jinpis.

[Planetary Rays]
But when a planet is in some sign, its rays will be in those signs that aspect that sign in the same degree and minute. For example, if Mars is in the first degree of Aries, and in the first minute of the same degree, its rays will be in the first degree of the sign Libra, and in the first minute of the same degree: and thus understand the other aspects, as is most clearly evident in this figure.

[Preface to the Reader]
It is the duty of the Astronomer to discover the rising of the stars, in what places the luminaries and other stars are held, and how they are connected or disjoined among themselves, and similar things. But what Ptolemy says, that those who are born with the Moon and Mercury disjoined, with Saturn by day, or Mars by night ascending to the horoscope, and beholding the aforesaid configuration, often become epileptic, pertains to the conjecture of Astrology. The chief writer in both arts is Claudius Ptolemy, who has handed down these arts more elegantly and truly than others: yet he, because of the subtlety and profundity of the matters, and especially in this part, his excessive brevity, will not have benefited much the unlearned reader who has not first learned the first elements from introductory books, of which the principal ones are: in Astronomy, those of Proclus and George Purbach; in Astrology, those of Alcabitius, whose brief and somewhat obscure sayings, for the sake of the beginners in this art, we will endeavor to explain more broadly, and illustrate with examples, when the matter so demands. But our other and principal aim in this commentary will be to diligently compare these teachings of Alcabitius, which serve especially for understanding the traditions of the Arabs, with the opinion of Ptolemy, which I see approved by all true practitioners. We hope, moreover, that this labor of ours will be neither ungrateful nor unfruitful to diligent young students. For from these our instructions, they will not only learn all the necessary precepts of this philosophy, but also be able to distinguish the true from the false and superstitious, the 'unreasoned', and easily understand in what respects the Arabs followed Ptolemy, in what they departed from him, and what absurdities they finally invented. And so on. He begins with an invocation in the manner of the ancients, who even in prose, like poets, are accustomed to begin with an invocation. Demosthenes, in his speech against Aeschines for Ctesiphon: 'First, indeed, O men of Athens, I pray to all the gods and goddesses that as much goodwill as I have always had both towards this city and towards all of you, so much may be granted to me by you in this present contest.' And Lycurgus in Leocrates: 'I pray to Athena and the other gods and heroes established throughout the city and country.'

[Ptolemy's Astrological Principles]
PREFACE. to judge. Universally in astrological treatment, either the parts, that is, the longitude, latitude, and substance and position of the heavens are considered, and the forces of all these are examined; or the proper powers and effects of the stars are explored; or finally, these two are compared with each other. Ptolemy, therefore, in his Quadripartite Construction, first explains what the inherent and proper nature of each star is in itself, and then, as if in the second place, he sets forth their adventitious nature by comparison with the Sun. Thirdly, he establishes the general constitution of the signs, which they derive from the temperament of the four seasons of the year. Hence some are called vernal, some aestival, some autumnal, and finally some hibernal signs. He then adds the nature of the four angles of the heavens, to which both stars and signs should be equally compared. Fourthly, he recites the constitutions of the signs derived from the peculiar property and inherent nature of each, by which means some are called tropical, some equinoctial, some bicorporeal, others again masculine, others feminine, and finally others quadrupedal, others human, others terrestrial, or otherwise denominated. Fifthly, he enumerates the properties of the signs which arise from their mutual collation. For this reason, some are called commanding, some obedient, some in diameter, square, trine, sextile, and other ways beholding each other, and finally some are called unconnected signs. Having thus explained the qualities of each separately, in the sixth and last place, he institutes a comparison of the stars to the signs, and teaches that some parts of the heavens agree with the Sun, others with the Moon, others with the other planets by house, exaltation, trigon, and bounds. Finally, he states that the dispositions of individual stars are to be examined in four ways. First, from the proper nature of each star; secondly, from the nature of the sign in which it is constituted; thirdly, from its configuration to the Sun; fourthly, from its configuration to the angles. His words, with which he concludes the first book containing the principles of the art, are these: "From all these things it is evident that the quality of each star is to be examined from its own natural peculiarity, and from the dodecatemoria surrounding it, and from its configurations to the Sun and the angles." Ptolemy expounded astrological precepts in such an order, which this author here (Digitized by Google) left, and somewhat changed, but in such a way that this change does not bring any significant inconvenience to the reader. And indeed, if the truth must be told, this method of teaching, which is proposed here, also has the advantage of facility and clarity. For in the first place, he shows the varied distribution of the zodiac, and briefly and concisely explains the general constitutions of the signs, which they derive from the four seasons and half-years. The next step, and more consistent with Ptolemy's method, would have been to explain the proper natures of individual stars. But the author, having deferred these to a later place, namely to the second difference, immediately compares the signs themselves with the stars and the stations of the heavens, and teaches how those general constitutions of the signs are promoted or diminished by the presence of the stars and by reason of their diverse positions in the heavens. For example, the power of the sign Leo, which is hot, is intensified by the presence of Mars or the Sun. Conversely, it is diluted if it is mixed with the body or ray of Saturn. Similarly, the power of cardinal signs is greater than that of succedent signs. And again, the virtue of these is found to be greater than that of cadent signs. Hence it is clear that the nature and constitution of one and the same Leo, or even of another sign, does not always remain the same due to the mixture of different stars and by reason of various positions to the Meridian and the setting point, but varies in many ways. And this is what the author says, that he will write in the first difference about the essential and accidental being of the signs. For he calls the general constitution of the signs and their inherent and innate property, as well as the increases or decreases of powers which they receive from the Sun and stars, the essential power of the signs. Ptolemy, however, calls it "energeia kata to kosmikon," that is, disposition according to the world; but the author calls the intensifications or remissions of qualities which happen to the signs by reason of different stations of the heavens, accidents, while Ptolemy calls it "energeia kata ten genesin e allon archen," that is, the disposition which occurs to the signs in a nativity or in another beginning of things. And this is to be understood not only of the signs, but also, and much more, of the stars in a similar way. Therefore, just as in the first difference of the signs, so in the following ones (Digitized by Google)

[Collection of Light]
8. DIFFERENCE. But if there is a collection of light, when two planets are not plainly conjoined, but both are conjoined to some third planet: then that third planet collects the light of both, and receives their nature, and projects it to the parts of the zodiac which it aspects by radiation, in which places any planet existing receives the light of the aforesaid two. For example, let the Sun be in Aries and Venus in Virgo, not seeing each other by any aspect, but Mars, traversing Cancer, sees the Sun from Aries and Venus from Virgo. In this case, Mars collects the lights of the Sun and Venus, and projects them to the places of their rays, or even to the planets existing there. That is, Mars, as a medium, conjoins the Sun and Venus, who are not conjoined by themselves, and renders or attributes their light both to places and to stars which it aspects. Again, if 7. In another way, the return of light, or the conjunction of two unconjoined stars, is said to occur if some third planet mixes with two planets that do not touch each other with rays, so that separating from one, it carries its light to the other to which it is conjoined. But this case does not differ from the translation of light, of which we spoke a little earlier. It follows that 8. He teaches that the conjunctions of planets are impeded in two ways. First, when three planets traverse one sign, if the slower planet is between the two lighter ones: then that middle planet prohibits their light from being communicated. For example, if Jupiter is in the 1st part, the Moon in the 11th part, and Saturn in the 5th part. In this case, Jupiter seeks the Moon, but Saturn prohibits this conjunction, who, being in the middle and closer, repels Jupiter and himself receives the Moon. If such a conjunction of the lighter planets would be bad, then the prohibition is useful and helps; but if good, it harms. Secondly, when two planets are in one sign, if the lighter of them is conjoined to the heavier, and a third planet strikes the same heavier planet with an equally near ray, that is, if the ray of the aspecting planet and the body of the planet existing in the same sign are equally distant from the heavier planet, then the one who is conjoined by body prohibits the aspecting planet from the aspect. But if the rays of the aspecting planet approach closer to the heavier planet, the society of the planet existing in the same sign being repelled, the conjunction of the aspecting planet with the heavier planet will be perfected. As if Saturn is in the 10th part, Mars in the 6th part of the same sign, Jupiter in the 6th or 11th part, casting his rays to the 6th part, then Mars is conjoined to Saturn by body, being repelled from Jupiter's aspect. On the contrary, if Jupiter is placed in the 7th part, irradiating the 7th part with a trine, he prohibits Mars from Saturn, and himself conjoins with Saturn, which is especially true if the one who prohibits is faster in motion than the one who is prohibited. But if the one who is prohibited is faster than the prohibitor, and will reach the body of the heavier planet sooner, the opposite seems to be true, since in this matter, everything that is potentially such, is understood to be actually such. 9. Pulsation first occurs when a planet is in some dignity, that is, in the house, exaltation, triplicity, or term of another planet, and the aspecting planet is said to pulsate, that is, to send the nature of that dignity to the lord himself, whose dignity it is: for the lord of the place is always understood to receive his virtue from the aspecting planet: as if the Sun is in Aries, aspecting Saturn traversing Virgo with a trine, then the Sun will send the nature of the house of Saturn to Saturn himself, the lord of the place. Similarly, if a light planet existing in one of its said dignities aspects another heavier planet having no dignity in the place where the light planet is: then the light planet transmits its own nature to the heavier and peregrine planet: as if the Moon is in the 7th part of Taurus, and Saturn in the 7th part of Virgo. Here the Moon sends its strength or virtue of exaltation to Saturn, although Saturn has no dignity in the Moon's place. 10. Reception occurs when a planet existing in its dignity aspects another who obtains dignity in the same place: as if Mars is in Aries, and constituted in his house and exaltation, sees Venus in Pisces, then Mars communicates both natures, namely his own and that which he obtains by reason of the house, to Venus. But if the inferior planet exists in the dignity of the superior, and vice versa the superior in the dignity of the inferior, there is a mutual and perfect reception, as in Aries and Libra, they receive each other by mutual reception. For Mars is in the house of Venus, and Venus in the domicile of Mars. Now follows 11. The return or rather restitution of virtue occurs when an inferior planet aspects a superior planet that is combust or retrograde, who, being weak, remits to the inferior planet the virtue which it had sent to him: as if the Moon is in Taurus, and aspects Mercury, combust or retrograde, in Capricorn. In this case, the Moon commits the nature of its exaltation to Mercury: but because Mercury is combust, he cannot retain the nature committed to him, therefore he returns to the Moon the light which he had received from her. When, however, the restitution is useful and when it is detrimental, is clearly evident in the text. Then follows 12. Refranation from a conjunction or aspect occurs when an inferior planet seeking the conjunction of a superior planet, is already retrograde, or because before it is conjoined partilely with the heavier planet, it will become retrograde. As if the Moon is in the 12th part of Virgo, and Saturn in the 5th part of Virgo. Here Venus is direct, but if reaching the 8th or 9th part, before the conjunction with Saturn, she begins to retrograde, she will be refranated in such a case from the conjunction of Saturn, and this, which at first sight seemed a simple application, will be changed into a mutual separation, if, namely, Venus retrograding, Saturn proceeds direct. For there is a mutual deflux, when the planet which is in more parts is direct, as was said above: but the one which holds fewer parts is retrograde. The same judgment applies to other configurations, if, namely, a planet goes to an aspect, but before it reaches it, begins to retrograde. This follows 13. When three planets are in the same sign, of which one is heavy, and the other two are lighter, so that one of the lighter planets has passed the heavy one, and the other seeks the conjunction of the same, but before it is conjoined to it, the one who passed the heavy one becomes retrograde, and by retrogradation is conjoined to the first heavy one: then passing the same, he also conjoins with the lighter one, and in this way destroys the conjunction of the former with the heavy one: as if Jupiter is in the beginning of the sign, Mars in the 8th part, and Saturn in the 10th part, retrograding. Here Jupiter seeks Saturn, but before he reaches him, Mars, having become retrograde in the 10th part, is first conjoined, and then meets Jupiter, and thus destroys Jupiter and Saturn. The author calls this contrariety; Cardan calls it perturbation. Perturbation, he says, occurs when two planets apply to each other, as to their natural motion: but there is a good third planet: a planet in more parts than both, who, before the first two are conjoined, either because he is already retrograde, or because he will become retrograde a little later, conjoins himself to the slower, and interposes himself between the first two, and thus perturbs the conjunction of the first planets. 14. Frustration from a conjunction or aspect occurs when a light planet seeks the conjunction of a heavy planet, but before it is conjoined to it, the heavy planet enters another sign, at the beginning of which are the rays of another planet, which aspects that sign. These rays, first meeting the heavy planet, then the light one, can frustrate the conjunction of the light planet with the heavy one in two ways: for example, let Mars be in the 29th part of Leo, and Jupiter in the 19th part of Leo, seeking the conjunction of Jupiter, but before he comes to him, Jupiter enters Virgo, at the beginning of which we imagine the rays of Saturn, who, first receiving Jupiter, then Mars, frustrate the conjunction with Jupiter. 15. The meaning is: When a light planet seeks the conjunction of a heavy planet, but before it reaches it, another planet is conjoined to that heavy planet by retrogradation, and thus cuts off the light of the first from the heavy planet: as if the Moon is in the 29th part of Taurus, Jupiter in the 24th part of Virgo, and Mars in the 1st part of Virgo, retrograding, looking at Saturn very closely from Virgo. In this case, Jupiter seeks the conjunction of Saturn, but before he completes it, Mars, by retrocession from Virgo, is conjoined partilely to Saturn, and thus cuts off the light of Saturn from Jupiter. Here the third planet, namely the retrograde one, or its rays, are placed at the beginning.

[Zodiacal Quarters and Planetary Order]
The first quarter, from the beginning of Aries to the end of Gemini, is hot, humid, vernal, youthful, and sanguine. The quarter from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Virgo is called hot, dry, aestival, juvenile, and choleric. The quarter from the beginning of Libra to the end of Sagittarius is called cold, dry, autumnal, melancholic, and signifies the beginning of the diminution of middle age. The quarter from the beginning of Capricorn to the end of Pisces is called cold, humid, defective, senile, hiemal, and phlegmatic. Among all the planets that are carried in these signs (not that they are in them, but because they are carried beneath them, that is, directly below them), Saturn is higher and closer to the circle of the signs and slower in its course, then Jupiter, then Mars, then the Sun, then Venus, then Mercury, then the Moon, which is closer to the Earth and swifter than all in its course. Certain significations are also indicated by the Head and Tail of the Dragon with the planets, as we will explain in the following sections. First, the length of the zodiac is divided into 12 parts, which the Latins call signs, and the Greeks call dodecatemoria, so that their number corresponds to the number of synodic months in a year. For the Moon, in a space of 29 days, always overtakes the Sun with its speed, and is conjoined with it twelve times each solar year, that is, once in each dodecatemorion. The fact that some years show us 13 lunations is not truly due to the annual time, but to the 11 days by which the Sun's circuit exceeds the twelve conjunctions of the luminaries, which cause intercalations. Moved by this reasoning, the Arabs attributed 354 days to the annual period. For 29 days, in which the luminaries are conjoined, collected twelve times, make 354 days. But the Egyptians and C. Julius Caesar, neglecting the monthly course of the Moon, concluded the limits of the year by the periodic motion of the Sun. However, even these do not agree in all respects. For the Egyptians and Persians ended the solar year in only 365 days, while Julius ended it in 365 days and a quarter of a day, that is, six hours. But leaving aside this variety of years, which is explained elsewhere, let us proceed to the following divisions of the zodiac. It seemed most useful to divide it into smaller arcs than the signs, if they were to distribute it into as many parts as the Sun traverses in its daily circuits. But indeed, since the number of days in a year, which is 365, was not at all suitable for calculations, astronomers divided not only the zodiac, but also all celestial circles in general into 360 parts, which number is close to the number of days in the tropical or turning year, and consists of many component or multiple parts, such as a half, a third, a quarter, a fifth part, a sixth, two-thirds, three-quarters, and others that follow, and for this reason easily admits all kinds of calculations. Now, if we divide 360 parts by 12, we will find that each dodecatemorion or sign of the zodiac consists of thirty degrees. For the younger astronomers call the thirty equally divided parts of each sign degrees, while the ancient Latin writers call them parts, and the Greeks call them moirai. And indeed, this division of one sign into thirty parts also corresponds to the motion of the Sun and Moon. For since the period of time in which the Moon, having departed from the Sun, again overtakes it, comprises almost 30 days, therefore the twelfth part of the sky, which the Sun has meanwhile traversed by its motion, is understood by nature itself to be cut into as many parts, which the more recent (astronomers) not absurdly call degrees from the Sun's daily progress, as I said. From these it is clear that in the more important divisions of the zodiac, namely into twelve signs, and the thirty parts of the signs, wise antiquity followed nature itself as its guide. Moreover, what the author adds, that each part is again divided as if whole into sixty minutes, and one first minute into sixty secondary minutes, one second into 60 third minutes, and similarly thereafter to fourth, fifth, sixth, and other minutes that follow in order, that mathematical division proceeds as calculation demands, this is established not by nature, but by art. The Greeks call these minute parts of the sky first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and so on. But to proceed beyond the first minutes in assigning motions is a matter of curiosity, not necessity, since the minute parts of the sky are entirely sufficient. Nor am I unaware that to extract the true motions of the stars from tables, even the following smallest minutes are usefully observed. In this sexagesimal system, that is, the number of sixty, the ancients also looked for the same computational convenience as in the number 360, which itself is composed of six sextants of a circle or sixty degrees, as was said. Therefore, they preferred the sexagesimal system to all other numbers. For among the smaller numbers composing a whole circle, none has so many multiple parts as sixty. For first, it consists of a half, that is, 30; then of a third, that is, 20; thirdly, of a quarter, that is, 15; fourthly, of a fifth part, that is, 12; fifthly, of a sixth, that is, 10; sixthly, of a tenth part, that is, 5; eighthly, of a fifteenth part, that is, 4; ninthly, of a twentieth part, that is, 3; and finally, of a thirtieth part, that is, 2. Therefore, practitioners not only attenuate the degrees of a circle as if whole into the smallest sexagesimal parts by perpetual sexagesimal division, as was said, but also continuously amplify the integers themselves with the same sexagesimal system, forming sexagesimals, that is, sexagesimal groups of integer parts: just as a sextant of a circle, which contains two dodecatemoria, or 60 parts, constitutes one first sexagesimal. And sixty first sexagesimals, that is, ten whole circles, make one second sexagesimal, and so on, ascending further, as the use of calculation may require. In such a numbering system, the degree or other form of things is placed in the middle, to which the calculator's thought assigns the force of an integer. Sexagesimals are placed on both sides, and to the right precede the sexagesimals collected from integers; to the left, however, follow the sexagesimal parts of the minute scruples. But the greater use and broader treatment of this matter is found in the logistics of astronomical scruples.

[Saturn and Journeys]
What is said about Saturn signifying long journeys, prisons, bonds, slowness, and affliction, and similar impediments to travel, should be understood thus: Saturn threatens these evils if he hostilely aspects the places of journeys (such as those of the Moon, Sun, Mars, and the Part of Fortune, according to Ptolemy) when they are in the seventh, ninth, or third house, and succeeds them. Ptolemy's words in Book 4, Chapter on peregrinations, are these: "If benefics aspect or succeed these aforementioned places, they decree honorable, glorious, and profitable journeys, and swift and unimpeded returns. But malefics decree laborious, harmful, dangerous, and impeded returns." These mentioned places, that is, those held by the Moon, or the seventh, ninth, or third house, if aspected by benefics and succeeded by them, decree honorable, clear, and profitable journeys, and swift and expeditious returns. But malefics decree laborious, harmful, dangerous, and impeded returns.

[Constellations and Astrological Characters]
Camerarius embraced these verses, which I have transcribed here for their elegance. Learn, studious boy, the names of the ancient labors, the starry ones, and recognize the shining signs of the heavens. They call those signs by which you see those temples distinguished, but they finally gave the number four and eight. The Great Bear holds the cold of the North, through which a huge Serpent glides like a river. Arctophylax follows this, but also the gem of the Crown, then Genu Nixus, after which Lyra, then Volucris. Then Cepheus and Cassiopeia, then Vector and Perseus, raising his scythe-like sword against the Gorgon. From here Deltoton, and Andromeda, from here you stand Pegasus, but the Dolphin receives you, this one the Arrow, this one the Eagle, and Ophiuchus. The Ecliptic follows these with its sloping orbit, in which are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. But the South holds these images under its axis: armed Orion, the Dog in which Sirius burns. Who is Procyon? And Lepus? And Jason's Argo is added, and Hydrus, and Centaurus, and the Altar unknown to us, then the more familiar Pisces, Cetus, and the waters of Eridanus. The former verses seem to express only 19 images, but two signs double the number. For Pegasus here signifies the section of the horse, or the first horse, and Pegasus or the second horse. Similarly, the word Ophiuchus is to be attributed to Ophiuchus and the serpent of Ophiuchus. The latter eleven verses also seem to name the stars. But Centaurus doubles the number. For the wolf or beast that Centaurus carries is a distinct constellation from Centaurus; Hydrus, however, triples the number. For on its back it carries the Crater and the thirsty Corvus. To these must be added the Southern Crown, which some call γρανίσκομ, that is, a small heaven, others call it retam ixionis. In this entire treatise, the appellations of the signs, degrees, and minutes, of the planets, as well as the aspects or radiations, and the intersections which the plane of the moon forms with the plane of the sun, will very often be used. Therefore, we here subjoin the significations of the characters, by which we can henceforth express all these things concisely and without tiring the reader. CHARACTERS OF THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC. Northern. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo. κριός. ταύρο. δίδυμοι. κάρκιν. λέωμ. παρθένα. Southern. Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. ζυγός ἤχαλαί. σκόρπιο. τοξότης. αιγόκερω. υδροχόο. ἰχθῦς. CHARACTERS OF THE SEVEN WANDERING STARS. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon. Φαίνωμ ἢ κρόνο. Φάεθωμ ἢ ζεὺς. πυρόεις καρης. ἵλιθ. ἀφροδίτκι φωσφόρο. ἕρμας ἢ τίλβωμ. σελήνη. CHARACTERS OF THE SPACES OF THE HEAVENS. Sig. Sign, δωδεκατημόριομτοιχειομ ἢ ζώδιομ. P. 1. 2. 3. 4. Part or degree μοίρα. Minute or first scruple, λεπτόμ πρώτομ, sc.1. Second scruple, δεύτερου λεπόμ, sc. Third scruple, τριόμλεπόμ, sc.3. Fourth scruple, τέταρτομ λεπόμ, sc.4. M.C. Midheaven, μεσγράνημα. M.I.C. Imum Coeli, ὑπόγειο ὑπὸ τὴ μεσκράνημα. CHARACTERS OF RADIATIONS, INTERSECTIONS & FORTUNE.

[Planetary Sects and Religions]
Regarding sects, Cardan noted these few things in his Supplement to the Ephemerides. He says the Jewish law is from Saturn, the Christian from Jupiter and Venus, and the Mohammedan from Mars and the Sun, according to how they rule. Hence, it guards justice, but with great impiety and cruelty. Idols are from Mercury and the Moon. And each law is overcome by its opposite: Saturn is overcome by Jupiter by authority and reason; Jupiter and Mercury are overcome by not listening to reasons and acting against authority; Mars and the Sun are overcome by Saturn through cunning, and Venus through lust; finally, the Moon and Mars are overcome by Jupiter and Venus through authority, dignity, and truth. These are general principles and apply to all peoples. Furthermore, Albubather and other Arabs teach that the future quality of each religion is to be inferred from the ninth house and the natural constitution of Jupiter as the significator of religion.

[Differences in Ascensions and Stature]
DIFFERENCE & Conjunction, synod. Sextile Aspect, hexagon. Square Aspect, tetragon. Trine Aspect, trigon. Opposite Aspect, diameter. Dragon's Head, anabibazon. Dragon's Tail, katabibazon. Part of Fortune, that is, Lot or Part of Fortune. And from these, the equinoctial circle not only divides the zodiac into its principal signs, etc., but also the entire globe of the world into two equal parts, one of which is called boreal and the other austral, from the winds erupting from these regions. Therefore, six signs of the zodiac, namely, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and also other stars, whatever incline into the boreal part from the equinoctial, are called boreal. The remaining six dodecatemoria of the zodiac, namely, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, and whatever other stars have receded to the south from the equinoctial, are called austral. Now, in order that the reason may be understood why some signs are called direct and others oblique or tortuous in their ascensions, it must be assumed from spherical principles that ascension is called the arc of the equinoctial co-rising with a given arc of the Ecliptic. There are two types of ascensions of signs, namely, direct and oblique. And in tables of directions or ascensions, direct ascension is called the arc of the equinoctial which co-ascends with a given arc of the zodiac in a right sphere. In Greek, anaphora epi tes orthos sphairas. Oblique or climatic ascension is called the arc of the equinoctial which rises with a given arc of the Ecliptic in the position of an oblique sphere. In Greek, anaphora epi tes enklimenes sphairas. The author here does not mean such ascensions of signs, which take their differences by reason of the right and oblique sphere, but speaks in general of the direct and oblique rising of signs, which is common to both the right and oblique sphere. According to this reasoning, we call ascension direct when a greater arc of the equator ascends than of the Ecliptic, and the parts of the Ecliptic consume more time in rising than the parts of the equator. Conversely, we call it oblique when fewer degrees of the equator than of the Ecliptic are carried above the Horizon, and the parts of the Ecliptic require less time in rising than the parts of the equinoctial. In the same way, the signs themselves are made some direct, which, while ascending, occupy a little more time; others oblique, which are carried upwards in a shorter time. And although in both the right and oblique sphere, some signs are found to have direct ascensions and others oblique ascensions, there is nevertheless some dissimilarity in their number. For in the oblique sphere, there are six signs of direct ascensions and as many of oblique ascensions. The direct ones are those which extend in the descending half of the zodiac from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Sagittarius, namely, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius. The oblique ones are the remaining ones, which extend in the ascending half of the zodiac from the end of Sagittarius to the beginning of Cancer, namely, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Gemini. But in the right sphere, only four signs, of which two on each side touch the solstitial points, namely, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius, and Capricorn, ascend directly; the remaining eight ascend obliquely. For this, we have made you a compendium in the following description. Direct Signs in the Oblique Sphere: Descending Half. Tortuous Signs in the Oblique Sphere: Ascending Half. Signs in the Right Sphere: Direct: Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius, Capricorn. Tortuous: Aries, Taurus, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius, Pisces. The tables of ascensions also clearly demonstrate that any given sign located in the descending half of the oblique sphere draws more parts of the equinoctial with it in rising than any sign placed in the other ascending half. And similarly, in the right sphere, the four signs contiguous to the solstitial points consume more time in ascension than the other eight signs. We have appended examples of this, first for the position of the right sphere, in which both poles lie on the horizon; then for the position of the oblique sphere and the altitude of the pole calculated for 51, 52, and 53 degrees, from which you will easily judge, in both situations of the sphere, not only which signs are direct and oblique, but also which have equal anaphoras. The anaphoras of the signs calculated for the right position of the world. Signs: Parts, Scruples. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. The anaphoras of the signs calculated for three oblique positions of the world. Pole: 51, 52, 53. Signs: Parts, Scruples. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. And tortuous. However, what the author wrote here, that six signs ascending in a direct path rule over the other six ascending obliquely and tortuously, namely, Cancer rules over Gemini, Leo over Taurus, Virgo over Aries, and others similarly rule over others which are equally distant from the tropical points, cannot be confirmed. For Ptolemy teaches us that these are not ruling or obedient, but beholding and of the same power. Similarly, those which the author calls concordant in their course because of equal anaphoras (which, whether they are in both situations of the sphere, the preceding descriptions of anaphoras sufficiently declare) Ptolemy transmits as ruling and obedient signs. But we here and everywhere will always prefer Ptolemy's opinion as superior to all others, and below, in its proper place, in his chapter on competent signs, we will clearly explain the entire doctrine of ruling and obedient signs. For we see no reason by whose aid we might dare to excuse the author in this, that either having abandoned Ptolemy, he subscribed to the opinion of others here, or he himself, by his own authority, ought to have changed these most elegant and most proper names of the parts of the zodiac transmitted by Ptolemy. Moreover, not contemptible physical reasons, and the very practice of the art, which we see approved by artisans, admonishes and exhorts us to keep the direct and oblique signs separate and distinct from the ruling and obedient ones. For it is known that illustrious writers judge some events from ruling and obedient signs, and others from direct and tortuous signs. From this it follows that events arising from the former do not at all correspond to the latter, and similarly, those effected by the latter cannot be accommodated to the power of the former without error. For example: One of the causes that declare the bodily quantity of those born is the rectitude or obliquity of the ascending signs, not the dominion or obedience of the signs. And conversely, one of the causes that generate benevolence and love towards others in the native is the ruling and obedient signs, and not, as the author seems to think, the rectitude or tortuosity of the signs. But in order that less learned readers may understand how the rectitude or tortuosity of the signs helps to form the stature of the body, and may be admonished by an easy example of the use of these distinctions, by which experts distribute the zodiac into various and distinctly named parts, I will here subjoin the 52nd statement of the Centiloquium, which, although it is by Hermes, we always see printed and circulated under Ptolemy's name. "The lords of the nativity of tall people are in the heights, and their horoscopes are in the beginnings of the signs. But those of short stature are found in the low places. To these, inquire whether the signs are direct or oblique." Pontanus thus interpreted these words: "The lords of the nativity of tall people are in the heights, and their horoscopes are in the beginnings of the signs. But those of short stature are found in the low places. To these, inquire whether the signs are direct or oblique." According to this opinion, there are three most powerful causes producing the tallness or shortness of the human body. The first is the lord of the nativity, or rather the lord of the ascending sign, placed in its orbs. For if it surveys the highest part, it confers tallness; but if it traverses the lowest part, it confers shortness of stature. The second is the number of degrees of the horoscoping sign; if its first parts pass the eastern horizon, then because of their strength, they produce tallness; if the extreme parts, because of exhausted strength, shortness; if finally the middle parts, by their moderate power, they produce a moderate stature. The third cause is the rectitude or obliquity of the horoscoping sign: the former, by prolonging the time of rising, also makes the body somewhat long; the latter, by shortening the time of ascending, shortens the body of the native. Example: When Titius is born, let Libra ascend, which is a direct sign. For with its thirty parts, in any altitude of the pole, more than...

[Significations of Planets]
Concerning garments, colors, tastes, parts of the human body, and innumerable such forms of things which agree with certain stars due to a similar temperament, much has been said above. We will also explain at the end of this difference to which stars days, nights, and hours are attributed.

[Body Stature and Ascendant]
Examples of anaphora indicate that thirty parts of the equinoctial rise. Let the beginning of Libra also ascend, so that its first or second, or even third, fourth, fifth, or sixth degree touches the eastern horizon. Finally, let Venus, the Lady of the geniture, be carried in the highest of her orbs. With these three causes concurring, as I have said, at Titius's birth, we will declare Titius to be of tall stature, even if he were born of short parents. For it is not doubtful that the good stature of parents, as well as the region in which people are commonly taller, also contributes much to tallness of stature. Conversely, if at Titius's birth, the last parts of the sign occupy the eastern horizon, and the rising sign itself is moreover oblique, like Aries or Pisces, and finally, if the Sun or Saturn, having obtained dominion of the geniture, is found depressed to the lowest parts of its orbs, we will not doubt that Titius will also be of shorter body and contracted stature. These are the extreme states of bodily stature. Mediocrity, however, which is produced when these do not all concur at once, is left to the sagacity of the prudent Physician to judge, according to whether more or fewer of those causes have concurred. The dikodiasotes or lord of the geniture, who it is, and by what reasons it is to be chosen, will be explained below in a more opportune place. In the meantime, by reason of long and short ascensions, one half of the zodiacal circle, which extends from the beginning of Leo to the end of Capricorn, is called the maximum half, because while it ascends, it occupies the most time. This same half is also called the half of the Sun, because Leo is of a solar nature, and in this half the Sun exercises that power which the other planets have in their own bounds. The other half, which extends from the beginning of Aquarius to the end of Cancer, since it shortens the time of rising the most, is called the minimum half. It is also called the half of the Moon, because just as the Sun holds principality in the maximum, so the Moon holds it in this minimum. For Cancer is familiar to the Moon. In all the other parts of this half, the Moon reigns just as the planets do in their own bounds, about which more will be said below. The bounds of the signs of the Zodiac, from which the principal causes of rising and setting flow, are of different qualities: some are general, others are derived from the familiarity of the Sun and Moon and other stars, others arise from their mutual collation, and finally, others are simply and without any mixture inherent and peculiar to each, as Ptolemy's opinion has been stated above. That he distinguished these in this way is apparent from his own words: "The general constitutions have the same ratio with the times. But in each there are other properties, some of which are taken from the familiarity of the Sun, Moon, and other stars; others are simple, which are inherent in each dodecatemory by itself, and which arise from their mutual collation." In exactly the same way, Alcabitius, after completing the division of the zodiac, explains the qualities and properties of its parts. And first, he insinuates the general qualities and natures of the signs by a certain proportion corresponding to the four seasons of the year, the four ages, and finally, the four humors of living beings. For in all these, the first part is humid and hot, with humidity predominating. Similarly, the second part is hotter than dry; the third is drier than cold; the fourth is colder than humid. But since the zodiac, inasmuch as it is a circle, has neither beginning nor end, it can be asked where its first part should be established and begin. We respond that it must be estimated and taken from the agreement of the qualities inherent in the effects with the qualities inherent in the more potent efficient causes. The oblique circle or zodiac is the efficient cause of nascent things. The seasons of the year and the humors of living beings are what are produced by it. For the Sun, traversing the zodiac, excites the qualities of the seasons of the year, each of which agrees with the humors of certain ages. Just as spring agrees with childhood, in which blood abounds; summer with youth and the choleric humor; autumn with decline and the melancholic humor; and finally, winter with old age and the phlegmatic humor. Since this is so, it is clear that each age of animals, and each humor, agrees principally in the order and power of qualities not only with certain times of the year, but also with those portions of the zodiac that produce such times. For from whatever cause each such thing exists, it must abound in that kind of quality. Therefore, the first age, in which animals abound in humidity and are soft and tender, agrees not only with the season we call spring, but also with that part of the zodiac which is the efficient cause of springtime, in order and nature. Such is that which extends from the beginning of Aries to the end of Gemini, since, when traversed by the Sun, it excellently moistens the air and the bodies enclosed in the air. Because of this great similarity of qualities equally dominating in the said portion of the sky, in springtime, and in the first age of animals, this first, vernal, childish, and sanguine quadrant of the zodiac is congruously named. For all these, just as they constitute the beginnings of things, so also they agree in heat and humidity; but they abound much more in humor than in heat. Furthermore, the first age of man (for this is principally discussed here), which they call childhood or rather the age of growth, extends from birth to the 21st year. In the same way, the subsequent seasons of the year and subsequent ages must be accommodated in order to the remaining subsequent quadrants of the zodiac. The second age, called the age of strength, extends from the 21st year to the 35th year, but in robust individuals to the 40th year, and because of its heat and dryness, it agrees with summer. Hence the portion of the zodiac that produces summer is called the second quadrant, hot and dry.

[Orbs of Planets]
The orb of a star is the space of the sky that the star affects circularly and from all sides, not so much by its ray or visible light, but by a hidden power and efficacy. The half or semi-diameter of this luminous orb, according to the tradition of the Arabs, is 15 parts for the Sun, 12 parts for the Moon, 9 parts for Saturn and Jupiter, 8 parts for Mars, and 7 parts for Venus and Mercury. However, Ptolemy shows these limits of rays somewhat differently, namely, the semi-diameter of the Sun extends 17 parts in all directions, the Moon 12 parts, Jupiter 12 parts, Saturn 10 parts, Venus 8 parts, and Mars 7 parts. This consideration is useful. For aspects are said to last as long as the orbs last, and according to them, both applications to conjunctions and separations from them are taken, as will be more clearly shown below in the doctrine of applications and defluxions. Many also call a planet combust when it is less than half its orb distant from the Sun, or precisely that much before and after.

[Ages, Seasons, and Temperaments]
The first age is dry, summery, youthful, and choleric. In all these, however, heat dominates. The third age of wisdom begins at age 35 and extends to age 50; in robust individuals, it progresses from age 40 to age 60. This age is compared to melancholic humor and the autumn season due to the decrease in heat and the dominance of dryness. This makes the portion of the zodiac that creates autumn called the fourth part: cold and dry, autumnal, melancholic, and deficient. The fourth age of debility universally begins between ages 50 and 60 and lasts until death. It is compared to phlegm, winter, and the last quarter of the zodiac, which is therefore called cold and humid, with redundant coldness, phlegmatic, wintry, and senile. This similarity of temperaments in ages and seasons of the year agrees with the opinion of physicians. For what Ptolemy makes the spring season humid and hot, and Galen temperate, they do not in fact disagree, since spring is humid in substance, but temperate in quality. Similarly, autumn is dry in substance, although it appears humid in quality, etc. As for the temperaments of the ages, Hippocrates widely stated that bodies that grow have a great deal of innate heat, which, as Galen teaches, is humid and hot according to its substance, as it inheres in an airy and watery substance. They call the subsequent age consistent, in which, although heat is intensified and sharpened according to quality, the innate heat is nevertheless diminished due to the underlying substance, in which, because of the impurity of added nourishment, the innate moisture is reduced, and the earthy parts are prominent. For similar reasons, the third age is drier, and old age is cold like winter. Since all these agree with the quadrants of the zodiac regarding temperaments, the nature or general constitution of all the dodecatemoria is clearly evident. For the three signs of each quadrant, which follow each other in order from any of the cardinal points, always agree in temperament. Just as the signs Taurus and Gemini found in the vernal section are hot and humid; those that follow in the aestival section, namely Leo and Virgo, are hot and dry. Hence, those placed in the autumnal section, namely Libra and Scorpio, are dry and cold. Finally, Sagittarius and Capricorn, which make winter, are humid and cold. But the middle ones of these, that is, the fixed signs, are especially such. Therefore, Taurus is very hot and very humid, and for this reason, the most temperate of all signs in the sky. Similarly, Leo is very hot and very dry, very bilious and very spirited. Likewise, Scorpio is very cold and very dry, but drier than cold, very pernicious and very inimical to human nature, for which reason poison is rightly attributed to it. Finally, the sign of Aquarius is very cold and very humid, and for this reason, very sluggish and very timid. Furthermore, the cardinal signs, that is, the first signs of each quadrant, excel greatly in one quality, while the other is diminished. Hence, in the dodecatemorion of Aries, humidity far surpasses heat. In Cancer, heat surpasses dryness; in Libra, dryness surpasses coldness; in Capricorn, coldness easily surpasses humidity. In the same way, in the last signs of the quadrants, which will be called bicorporeal and common below, one quality is strong, but in reverse order, and where one quality does not so excellently and excessively suppress the other. Therefore, in the dodecatemorion of Gemini, heat exceeds humidity; in Virgo, dryness exceeds heat; in Sagittarius, cold exceeds dryness; and finally, in Pisces, humidity exceeds cold. This is the general constitution of the twelve dodecatemoria, from which it is clear that the entire northern half of the zodiac is hot, and the southern half is cold, as the author intended. (There follows an admonition about the order and position of the planets, in which, following Ptolemy, he places those superior to the others that complete one period in a longer time. Hence, the star of Saturn, since it completes one revolution in its equal motion in 29 years, 162 days, and almost 7 hours, and appears smallest due to its great distance from Earth, it is consistent that it is the highest and encompasses the largest circle. The star of Jupiter traverses the entire Zodiac in 11 years, 315 days, and almost 174 hours, and therefore occupies a lower orbit than Saturn. Mars follows this, completing one revolution in one year, 320 days, and 222 hours. The Sun, leader and moderator of the others, placed in the middle, traverses the Zodiac in 365 and a quarter days. First Mercury, then Venus, are placed below the Sun, each of which completes the entire Zodiac in the same amount of time as the Sun. For the lines of the mean motions of Mercury, Venus, and the Sun are always conjoined, for which reason they are called isodromoi, homodromoi, and xandromoi to the Sun. The newest star and most familiar to Earth, and found by nature as a remedy for darkness, is the Moon, which completes one period in 27 days and almost 8 hours. This is Ptolemy's opinion on the order of the planets, from which some dissent. Indeed, all agree on the order of the three superior planets. The Moon is also, by everyone's opinion, the lowest, because it deprives us of the Sun's aspect and has a more manifest parallax, which they commonly call the diversity of aspect. Therefore, the controversy remains regarding the position and order of Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Plato and Aristotle place Mercury immediately above the Moon, then Venus immediately above Mercury, then Mars above Venus, and finally, as before, ascending in order, Jupiter and Saturn. Those who advocate this opinion offer this reason: If, they say, Mercury, Venus, and Mars were situated below the Sun, they would obscure it no less than the Moon (if not entirely, at least some part of it) whenever they were conjoined with the Sun and placed between the Sun and our sight; since this has never been observed in any age, they therefore believe that the stars Mercury, Venus, and Mars are placed above the Sun. However, this objection, by which they imagine an obscuration of the Sun by the intervention of Mercury or Venus, can be easily refuted. And first, it is evident that the Moon is occulted by the intervention of the Sun: For the body of the Moon, which shines only when illuminated by rays, since it is opaque and dark by its nature, and so dense that it hardly allows the passage of incident rays, and strongly reflects all received light, it is not surprising if it obstructs our view by its interposition. But since Venus and Mercury are not opaque, but very luminous bodies, they cannot obscure the Sun at all. Secondly, Mercury, Venus, and Mars mostly wander outside the ecliptic, and can rarely be so conjoined with the Sun that they fall into a line drawn from our sight through the center of the Sun, and thus be placed between our aspect and the Sun. Finally, even if this also happens, and as it can happen, an observable conjunction of one of these occurs: nevertheless, since the apparent smallness of these stars is such that they cannot deprive us of any part of the Sun that can be perceived by the senses, those who subject the Sun to these stars for no other reason than that they do not deprive us of its sight in conjunctions with the Sun, do not seem to be heard. Furthermore, although the Moon can be shown to be 6644 times smaller than the Sun: nevertheless, due to its low position, it appears of such magnitude.

[Planetary Years and Fridaria]
We have described all the planetary years mentioned by this author in the following table. The years of Fridaria: Sun 10, Moon 9, Saturn 11, Jupiter 12, Mars 7, Venus 8, Mercury 13. Maximum years: Sun 1461, Moon 520, Saturn 465, Jupiter 427, Mars 284, Venus 551, Mercury 480. Major years: Sun 120, Moon 108, Saturn 57, Jupiter 79, Mars 66, Venus 82, Mercury 76. Medium years: Sun 69, Moon 66, Saturn 43, Jupiter 45, Mars 40, Venus 45, Mercury 48. Minor years: Sun 19, Moon 12, Saturn 5, Jupiter 13, Mars 12, Venus 15, Mercury 18. What the Arabs mean by Fridaria years will be explained in the third to last chapter of the fourth difference. But the Arabs call maximum years the duration of time during which the effects of planets last in universal and great world changes. Through major, medium, and minor years, the Arabs are accustomed to deriving the spans of life in human nativities, as we will see below in the fourth difference, in the chapter on Alcocodes. Furthermore, Ptolemy nowhere mentions any of this kind of years contained in this place, undoubtedly indicating by his silence that the observation of minor years is useless. However, he seems to make mention of major years in the first apotelesmatic chapter on boundaries, but in such a way that he also leaves them to be despised.

[Planetary Houses and Dignities]
28. The apparent diameter of the Moon, when it is most distant, is 29 minutes, but when it is closest, it is almost 36 minutes. The apparent diameter of the Sun, when it is most distant from the Earth, fills 31.5 minutes of the sky, and when it is closest, 34 minutes. Now, from a comparison of the Moon's closest apparent diameter to the Sun's apparent diameter, wherever it may be, it is clear that the body of the Sun can be completely obscured by the intervention of the Moon's body, even if not for a long duration. Conversely, the apparent diameter of Venus, according to the observations of skilled astronomers, barely equals a tenth part of the Sun's diameter. And since the planes of two orbs relate to each other in the duplicate ratio of their diameters, the ratio of the apparent solar plane to the apparent plane of Venus is as 100 to 1. Therefore, if Venus were to cover the Sun, it would cover only one hundredth of its apparent part, which could not be noticed by the senses of the eyes. Regiomontanus, in the beginning of the 9th book of Ptolemy's Epitome, defends him thus: It is not consistent that the space between the Sun and Moon should be empty of stars, since it is greater than the interval extended from the center of the Earth to the orbs of the Moon. For the minimum distance of the Sun from the center of the world contains 1070 Earth semidiameters, and the Moon at its highest is distant from the center of the universe by almost 64 of the same Earth semidiameters. Subtracting these from the Sun's distance leaves 1006 Earth semidiameters, which is 865,160 German miles. It is not likely that such a vast interval between the two luminaries should be entirely devoid of stars. 9. Concerning the existence of stars in the signs, when the orbs of the luminaries and other planets are understood to be affixed to the sky, etc. Therefore, when we say, for example, that the Sun is in Aries, it is not to be understood as if the Sun's highest heaven, approaching, is carried among the fixed stars, but rather that it moves under that part of the zodiac which is called Aries. The author of the Sphere teaches that planets exist in the signs in four ways. But the true and most exact place of the Sun or planets lacking latitude in the ecliptic is indicated by a line extended from the center of the Earth through the center of the star to the outermost heaven. As for those stars that have latitude and move outside the ecliptic, their true places are most certainly shown by that part of the periphery which extends through the pole of the Zodiac and the center of the star to the ecliptic; for that point of contact in the Zodiac is the true place. 29. the focus of that star according to longitude. In this way, the polar star, as they call it, of the third magnitude, although it is 66 degrees away from the ecliptic, is now referred to 20 degrees 52 minutes of Gemini, according to the Prutenic calculation. 10. The Dragon is a figure that the paths of the Sun and Moon create. For the plane of the Moon's orbit intersects the Sun's ecliptic along the world's diameter, so that one part of it deviates 5 degrees to the north from the ecliptic, and the other to the south. This inclination of the Moon's orbit in opposite directions is called the winding path of the Dragon, from a certain similarity to huge serpents whose belly is looser and wider than their head and tail. One of these intersections, where the Moon ascends to the northern region, is called the Dragon's Head; the Greeks call it anabibazon, that is, the ascending or rising node, whose usual character is ☊. The other intersection, where the Moon descends to the south, is commonly called the Dragon's Tail; the Greeks call it katabibazon, that is, the descending or lowering node, and its usual character is ☋. The northern limit (boreum poras) is the midpoint of the northern lunar semicircle. The southern limit is directly opposite the former, similarly the midpoint of the southern lunar semicircle: the common people call these the bellies of the Dragons. With these things being so, it is manifest that between both limits and the nodes themselves, quadrants of a circle are encompassed, and the Moon, when positioned in the nodes, is entirely deprived of latitude, and attains its maximum latitude at the limits. Finally, it must be known that these points of the Moon's nodes and limits are not fixed, but daily move from east to west by 3 minutes, so that a reason can be given why lunar eclipses always occur when the Moon is not at its closest. CONCERNING THE HOUSES OF THE PLANETS. 1. The planets also have certain powers in these signs, some by nature, some by accident. Those that are by nature are these: House, Exaltation, Term, Triplicity, Face. We will treat those that are by accident in a convenient place. The Houses are these: Aries and Scorpio, houses of Mars; Taurus and Libra, houses of Venus; Gemini and Virgo, houses of Mercury; Cancer, house of the Moon; Leo, house of the Sun; Sagittarius and Pisces, houses of Jupiter; Capricorn and Aquarius, houses of Saturn. 2. The seventh sign from the house of each planet is said to be its detriment. 3. And if two signs are the house of one planet, they are said to be concordant in the Almantica, that is, in the circle which is broad in the middle and tightly bound, and is meant to signify the Zodiacal circle. 4. The signs in which planets are said to rejoice when they enter them, and their lords, according to Dorotheus, are these: Saturn is said to rejoice when it enters Aquarius; Jupiter in Sagittarius; Mars in Scorpio; Venus in Taurus; Mercury in Virgo. 1. Having set forth the division of the Zodiac and the general constitution of the signs, as the order explained above requires, it now wishes to show other properties of the signs derived from the familiarity of the luminaries and other wandering stars. But perhaps someone here will criticize me, saying that this is a new exposition or one alien to the author's meaning. For since the Author here prefaces that he will speak of the powers of the planets, both inherent and accidental, he does not seem to want to say in what ways the general constitution of the signs is intensified or remitted. But our exposition is not without reason. For he who discusses how the virtue of the planets is intensified by kindred qualities and the familiarity of suitable signs, or diluted by contrary ones, at the same time tacitly treats the intensification and remission of the qualities inherent in the signs. For those temperaments that are associated with similar ones make the quality of both concurring more efficacious, as: because the Sun and Leo agree; therefore, when the Sun passes through Leo, it increases the heat and dryness of the sign, and the power of the star in turn aids the kindred quality of the sign of Leo. From this, it is clear that this treatment of the association and agreement of the planets with the signs pertains to increasing or decreasing both the power of the signs and the power of the planets. However, I do not see how the author can make the familiarity of the planets with the signs partly natural and partly accidental. For since he admits that the stars are naturally reconciled to the signs by house, exaltation, trigon, and terms, what reason can remain by which the stars are accidentally associated with the signs? None. Since this is so, therefore, in the last chapter, which he titled 'Concerning the Accidental Powers of the Planets,' he could justly compare not the stars to the signs, but the temperament of diurnal and nocturnal time. The sex of the signs is also not accidental, but natural. But the twelve stations themselves and the quadrants of the world, which either the daily motion of the heavens or the places of the luminaries, as will appear below, create, can have nothing in common with the signs. Let us therefore hold to the method explained by us above, and to be repeated here again for its great utility, namely, that we must observe the disposition of both the signs and the stars, both cosmically and natally. And so that he may first speak of the signs, certain general qualities are found in them, such as those already explained in the first chapter. These same qualities are then increased, as will now be said, by the association of the planets when their temperaments agree, or they are diluted and weakened when the qualities are contrary. If you add to these the properties of the signs peculiarly inherent in each, and generated from mutual comparison, you will have all the cosmic constitutions of the signs. The remaining power or weakness of the signs, which accrues by reason of the position of the heavens, is called 'according to birth' or 'fortuitous disposition.' For the daily motion of the heavens, with its ineffable swiftness, varies the position of the heavens not only every hour, but every moment of time, and leads the celestial signs to other and other places. From this it follows that the effects and significations of one and the same sign, affected in the same way by its nature, are diverse.

[Saturn's Strength in Regions]
That which says the strength of Saturn is intensified in the northern region does not agree with Ptolemy's statements. For it has been demonstrated above that the north agrees with Jupiter, just as Venus agrees with the south, Saturn is tempered in the east, and Mars in the west.

[Messahella and Dorotheus on Body Shape]
The sayings of Messahella and Dorotheus that follow are to be referred to defining the figure of a native's body, which we mentioned above.

[Planetary Domiciles and Qualities]
It was wisely appointed that each of the two luminaries, according to the quality of its genus, should preside over a sign congruent to its sex. The other planets, namely Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, each reside in two signs, one masculine and one feminine: one is placed in the descending half, the other in the ascending half. But the domiciles of Mercury are closest to the luminaries on both sides, which in turn touch the habitations of Venus, these are surrounded by the seats of Mars, these by Jupiter, and finally by Saturn, a summary of which we have described for you in the following figure. Behold how aptly and wisely ancient wisdom established their domiciles for each planet. For the Sun and Moon, as they approach our zenith most closely, and strike our regions more directly than the other signs, provide hospitality to the two luminaries, which easily surpass the other planets in magnitude, clarity, and effects, and this not indifferently, but a masculine, diurnal, and hot sign receives the Sun, which abounds in the same qualities: while Cancer, being feminine, nocturnal, cold, and humid, fosters the Moon of the same nature. Each domicile also seems to have been conveniently attributed to the luminaries, lest the power and might of the luminaries, which is indeed the chief of all celestial bodies, should be distracted by too many commands and rendered weaker. That the kingdoms of the other wandering planets were assigned with equal prudence can easily be shown.

[Planets and Regions]
As for regions, they first ascribe the first climate to Saturn with his houses and signs. The second to Jupiter with his signs. The third to Mars with his signs. The fourth to the Sun with his sign. The fifth to Venus with her signs, which inclines Italians to luxury and effeminacy. The sixth to Mercury with his signs. The seventh to the Moon with her sign.

[Planetary Detriment and Exaltation]
Nor did they wish Capricorn and Aquarius to be familiar to Saturn without cause. For since Saturn is the greater infortune, coldest and darkest in temperament, and holds the highest and most remote orb, it is most consistent with truth that he should primarily show his dominion and power in signs most remote from the domiciles of the luminaries, malefic and coldest, and opposite to the houses of the luminaries, which aspect is notably evil. Capricorn is opposed to the domicile of the Moon, that is, Cancer: and Aquarius to the domicile of the Sun, that is, Leo. Next in order, Jupiter follows Saturn, who is the greater benefic, and thus Sagittarius and Pisces conveniently host him, both of which are Jovian in nature, since the sign of Pisces is fertile, and Sagittarius moves the winds. Moreover, they behold the houses of the luminaries with the best, that is, a trine aspect. But Jupiter sees Pisces, and Mars follows Jupiter in order as the lesser infortune. Therefore, he is familiar with Aries and Scorpio, which strike the houses of the luminaries with a square, that is, a moderately evil aspect. But Scorpio strikes Leo, and Aries strikes Cancer. For the same reasons, Venus, the lesser benefic, has Taurus and Libra, which strike the houses of the luminaries with a sextile aspect, which is moderately good. Moreover, since the star of Venus is more fertile than all others, it is rightly considered an associate of fertile signs. Taurus is a fertile sign among animals, the sign of Libra is fertile in seeds. The remaining two signs, namely Gemini and Virgo, which do not see the houses of the luminaries, but touch them on both sides, are left, because Mercury never departs more than 27 degrees from the Sun. Hence it is that he never aspects the Sun with any aspect. The maximum elongation of Venus from the Sun is about 48 degrees, and thus she can only be conjoined to the Sun by a sextile aspect, and that a platic one. But it is necessary to observe not only the conciliations of stars and places, but also the places adverse to those with which they are familiarly conjoined. For just as the virtue of stars, if united with a kindred quality of places, becomes far more efficacious: so on the contrary, as Ptolemy says, if they are found in alien places, and contrary to their condition, that is, which are opposed to those signs in which they are hosted or exalted, or in some other way increase their strength, their contrary and dissimilar virtue is greatly weakened and dissipated by the constitution of the signs. Ptolemy's words on this matter are these: "When they are found in places alien and of a contrary sect, much of their proper power is weakened, producing another nature according to the dissimilar mixture of the surrounding signs." Therefore, after it has been briefly indicated which planets gather their domestic strengths in which signs, there are now subjoined the signs in which, as if driven into exile, they are exiled, and suffer no small loss of their strengths. The seventh sign, says the author, from the house of each planet, that is, the opposite sign, is called the detriment of the planet: others call it exile. Ptolemy generally calls it "the alien place and of a contrary sect." For example, the seventh sign from the house of the Sun, that is, from Leo, since it is the sign of Aquarius, therefore the sign of Aquarius is the detriment of the Sun. Thus the Moon in the sign of Capricorn, opposite to the Cancerian dodecatemorion, suffers detriment. Similarly, Mars in Libra and Venus in Aries dissipate their domestic strengths. This detriment will be considerably increased if, moreover, the nature of the sign is contrary to the strengths of the planet. As when Mercury is in Sagittarius, then not only is he exiled from his house, but also weakened by the contrary intemperance of the sign, he contracts his powers for doing good. On the contrary, when Mercury is in Pisces, although he is exiled from his house just as in Sagittarius, yet the kindred nature of the sign assumes the power to harm due to immoderate coldness. For although Pisces is a watery sign, yet because of its familiarity with the Moon, it is cold and humid. In the same way, planets exert their strengths in their exaltations, and contract them in opposite places, as Mars, as we shall say, is exalted in Capricorn, and cast down in the opposite sign of Cancer. And so it must be judged concerning the opposite signs of the other dignities. But in triplicities and terms, since this detriment is not significant, but rather brief, astrologers have therefore neglected the opposites of these places, and only consider the opposites of houses and exaltations.

[Parts of Strength and Stability]
What is to be thought of the parts of strength and stability, and all other strong parts, will be explained below in the fifth Difference. From what we have extensively noted here about Saturn, the diligent reader will easily grasp the descriptions of the other subsequent planets. For the method of explanation is everywhere the same and equal, and once understood in the consideration of one planet, it will not be difficult to adapt it as an example to the descriptions of the others.

[Concordant Signs and Zodiacal Form]
From the foregoing, it is clear that signs are called concordant in transit when they have equal anaphoras in any climate. But since the two signs, which are said to be ruled by one planet, have unequal ascensions, it is quite clear that the author here understands something different by the concordance of signs in the zodiac than by their concordance in transit. Perhaps he calls the two signs hosting one planet concordant in the Zodiac because they recede equally from the domiciles of the luminaries: for Taurus and Libra are the houses of Venus, and they are equally distant from Leo and Cancer, the houses of the Sun and Moon, on both sides. By the same reasoning, you see the domiciles of the other planets equally removed from the houses of the luminaries in the figure described a little earlier. But when he says that such signs are called concordant in the Almantica, that is, in a circle which is wide in the middle and narrow at the ligature, it is a notation of the zodiac, which you will easily understand from the following description of the Zodiac. From the common section of the solstitial colure and the ecliptic, count 6 or 8 parts on each side (for Venus usually departs almost 8 parts from the Sun's limit), and at the ends of these arcs, imagine two lines from the center of the world, which, together with the solstitial colure revolved around the poles of the ecliptic, will describe the form of the Zodiac, which, emerging from the center of the earth at its narrowest part, occupies a sufficiently wide and ample space in the outermost orb. This latitude of the ecliptic itself, that is, the plane in which the Sun perpetually moves, divides it into two equal parts. By ligature, therefore, he understands the junction of the equator with the ecliptic, which, like the Horizon, meridian, or other circle, is understood to be a flat extremity without any latitude. When he says: "It is wide in the middle," he understands the thickness of the zodiac, which, since it is sufficiently wide not only at the extreme but also in the middle of the sky through which the Sun runs, cannot form any certain ligature or intersection with the equator.

[Moon's Phases and Qualities]
The last part of the narration about the Moon, which begins there (And some said that it signifies childhood from the beginning of the month, up to 7 days, etc.), is worthy of annotation, and especially what follows there (And some said that the Moon, indeed, at the conjunction, up to half of its first light, will be of a humid nature, etc.). For the former of these parts expresses the opinion of others; the latter, however, expounds Ptolemy's view on the different configurations of the Moon and other planets to the Sun. Ptolemy's words on this matter are these: "The Moon and the three wandering planets, namely Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, receive more or less of their inherent powers according to their configurations to the Sun. For the Moon, from its first rising until the increment of the first quadrature, when it shines as if halved, is most effective of humidity; from there until the full moon, of heat; then from the full moon until the diminished half, of dryness; finally, from the second quadrature until its occultation, of coldness. The wandering stars, when morning stars, until the first station, have most humidity; from the first station until they rise at night, they heat more; from the nocturnal shining until the second station, they dry more; finally, from the second station until their setting, they cool more." From these words, it is clear that the Moon and the three superior planets (for Ptolemy excludes Venus and Mercury from this comparison, because they never come to opposition with the Sun) have four states with respect to the Sun. The first state begins from their rising, when they cast off the Sun's rays, and extends to the first quadrature. From here, the second state lasts until the opposition, from which more certainly...

[Planetary Joys and Dignities]
The last sentence of the clause is that, besides the Sun and Moon, each planet has two houses, and of these, one is more familiar to it, and is called its joy. That such and so great a dignity is principal and primary, there is no doubt. But for Ptolemy, on the contrary, joy is the planet's dignity, the last of all others. For even if a star were in places...

[Planetary States and Qualities]
The third state is derived to the second quadrature. Finally, the last state ends in occultation. Hence it is clear that stars moving with the Sun and oppressed by its rays, as if placed outside all states, obtain no powers. If, therefore, we wish to join to this comparison that space also, in which the stars are held enveloped by the Sun's rays from occultation until the first shining, we will find that there are five states of them with respect to the Sun, one of which, namely the last, is that in which they can do absolutely nothing, and therefore it is rightly omitted by Ptolemy. The difference of the four states is also most worthy of consideration. In the first state, indeed, the stars are illustrious. For having recently emerged from the Sun's rays, they become conspicuous to all, and obtain a pure and sincere substance in their plates, just as recently born bodies consist of a more humid and purer substance than those of adults. Therefore, then representing infancy and childhood, consistent with their nature, they will produce substances and impressions more humid than hot, and especially the Moon. For when, as Ptolemy teaches, it increases humors due to its proximity, it will certainly moisten most, when it has been moved closest to the earth in the quadratures. It will also have moderate heat, because in such a state it draws moderate light from the Sun: and so, due to the superabundance of humor easily suppressing heat, it will putrefy most. For this reason, I think the first quarter is called childish by some. For even in the bodies of these, we see that the substance of pure humidity easily overcomes heat. Stars that have attained the second state are hotter, both because of the absorption of humidity and because of the increase in heat. For since the stars primarily heat by the light drawn from the Sun, they will heat most when they shine with increasing light. The age that follows childhood also heats more vehemently, and the abundance of childish humors diminishes more and more. In the third state, dryness dominates. But someone may say, how will the three superior planets, shining with full and ample light in opposition to the Sun, and moreover traversing the perigee of the small circle, becoming closer to the earth, dry out, since it has been said that stars draw vapors and moisten more, the closer they are to the earth? The Moon also, moving from the opposition of the Sun to the second quadrature, and at the same time hastening from the apogee of the eccentric to its weirdo? We answer that stars placed in opposition to the Sun become drier according to quality, not according to substance. Who doubts that bodies declining in vigor, and especially obese ones, have a greater abundance or quantity of humidity than they had before in childhood, and yet they are said to be dry, not indeed according to quantity, which is greatest, but according to quality. For in the former age, humid and concocted parts dominate dryness and crudity: in the latter, however, dry and crude parts easily suppress innate humidity. Thus the substance or quantity of light of the three superior planets, placed in opposition to the Sun, is most ample and illustrious, but dry according to quality. Similarly, the Moon is to be judged. But if it is dry, why then, and especially in the quadrature following the fullness, does it moisten most, and by moistening, does it putrefy most, all of which are confirmed by experience, that at no time does the plague rage more than in the last quarter, and at no time do the tides of the ocean usually overflow more? We answer that the body of the Moon is by itself more humid than all the others, and because of its very swift circuits, it does not age so much, and for the most part perpetually preserves its nature of humidity. Therefore, in the second quadrature, approaching the earth most closely, it will moisten most, and because of the decrease of light and heat, it will putrefy most, and it will carry away the ocean with great impetus, because then it agrees most with the element of waters in both qualities, namely humidity and coldness. Finally, in the fourth state, there is no doubt that the stars are cold: for then they are removed from the earth, and approaching the Sun more closely, they turn less light towards us. And they said 19. Towards the end of this narration, he adds the opinions of some about the sympathy of the planets with the qualities of the soul. Ptolemy teaches that two planets, namely Mercury and the Moon, principally agree with the qualities of the soul, and indeed to Mercury he attributes the intellectual and rational part of the soul: but to the Moon he attributes the duller and moral-governing part of the soul. Indeed, the intellect has imagination, ratiocination, memory, and the other qualities of the soul that pertain to cultivating genius and illuminating the mind, with all of which Mercury principally agrees and sympathizes, it is clear why, when Mercury is afflicted, genius itself and the mind itself are disturbed by dull darkness. But the duller part of the soul is nothing other than the obedience of the lower powers and will to the judgment of the intellect. It therefore has justice, fortitude, temperance, and the other moral virtues that are contained under these categories: with all of which the Moon agrees, it is clear why, when the Moon is afflicted, men arise who deviate from common custom and the practice of life. But why did they want the Moon to preside over the lower powers, and Mercury over the higher part of the soul? Because, as was said above, the Moon presides over the brain, from which the nerves and organs of sensation are derived, and therefore it not undeservedly governs those virtues that depend on the senses and are closer to them. Mercury, however, since it has the spirits of the brain, which are the organs of the mind's actions, therefore dominates more than all those things that proceed from the mind. In addition to these, every other planet is also the source of peculiar qualities of the soul. Saturn, therefore, is the source of that power which is called retentive, from which it generates a firm memory, perseverance, and tolerance of labors. Jupiter has probity and simplicity. Mars has fortitude, promptness, audacity, anger, and cruelty. Ambition and pride are familiar to the Sun. Venus loves luxury and elegance. Just as individual planets principally agree with certain members: so also these qualities of the soul originate from different parts of the body, and are never brought into action unless they are first stimulated and aroused by the nerves and spirits of the brain. Therefore, Ptolemy wisely considered not only the places, but also the rulers of these places, since they themselves arouse their qualities in the soul. 20. The last clause, which begins, there (And because we said in this chapter, etc.) I can hardly guess what it meant to signify. And I do not know whether this obscurity should be attributed to the interpreter or rather to the writer. I think, however, that the meaning is that from the mutual mixture of the stars, many other temperaments arise, so that the exposition of the words is: Just as the different positions of the planets to the Sun vary their powers, as was said a little earlier: so in the same way, mutual inter se comKk

[Exaltation and Debilitation of Planets]
Just as the Sun is exalted in the 19th degree of Aries, so it falls in the 19th degree of Libra, and so on for the others. Ptolemy, however, places the entire sign of Aries as the exaltation of the Sun, and the entire sign of Taurus as the exaltation of the Moon, and similarly for the rest. These are the 'hypsomata', the exaltation or altitude of a planet among astrologers, not understood as a local position or distance from the earth, or from another point, etc., by which imagination Pliny was deceived (Book 2, Chapter 16), but rather as that part of the zodiacal sign which, when the stars have reached it, they show the greatest change in the air and in other inferior things. For example, when the Sun first enters the 19th part of Aries, it immediately shows us manifest spring. The reason for these altitudes is this: The Sun is exalted in Aries because, by ascending through Aries into the northern semicircle, it causes evident increases in both days and heat in bodies. For the opposite reason, it lies in its debility, since, as we said before, as much virtue and energy as the kindred quality of the signs adds to the stars, so much of their own strength is taken away by the dissimilar constitution of contrary or opposite places. Since each of the planets is exalted in that place where another of a different nature and efficiency suffers the contrary, and the Sun is the author of clarity and heat, while Saturn is the author of darkness and cold: therefore, just as with houses, so the places of Saturn's altitude are deservedly opposed to the Sun. Therefore, Saturn's altitude is in Libra, and its debility is in Aries. For where heat is intensified, there cold must be remitted; and conversely, where heat diminishes, cold increases. When the luminaries conjoin in Aries, then the Moon first appears, and with increased light, it shines forth in Taurus, the principal sign of its triplicity; therefore, Taurus is said to be its altitude, and Scorpio its debility. But Jupiter is exalted in Cancer, because it is the mover of the northern and more fertile winds. Therefore, being carried closest to the north, it shows its greatest strength in Cancer and Pisces, and is debilitated in Capricorn. And Mars, by its nature fiery, is exalted in Capricorn, opposite the sign of Jupiter's altitude, and by reason of Cancer being most remote from our zenith, and thereby tempering Mars' ardor. For the power of Mars, the more moderate it is, the greater it becomes. For the opposite reason, it is debilitated in Cancer. Moreover, since the powers of Jupiter and Mars in action are plainly dissimilar: for one, for example, is the author of justice and humanity, while the other is the author of injustice and ferocity, for this reason they have rightly obtained adverse places of altitude. But Venus, the mistress of humidity and pleasures, shows her greatest strength in Pisces, and is debilitated in Virgo. Furthermore, Mercury, which is rather dry, the giver of intellect, learning, and other mental goods, and altogether of contrary efficiency, has thus obtained an altitude and debility contrary to Venus: an altitude indeed in Virgo, where autumnal dryness impends; and a debility in Pisces. Haly says that Mercury is exalted in Virgo because when the Sun is in Leo, Mercury begins to appear in Virgo in the evening, which is taken from the similarity of the Moon. This is the reason for exaltations and debilities. But nevertheless, these and many other things in astrology are based more on experience than on demonstrations. A doubt follows, whether planets are exalted universally throughout entire signs, or whether exaltations are to be observed in certain parts. Hermes leaves the signs enumerated here to the altitudes of the planets, but he establishes that each planet is most exalted in the 15th part of its sign, which certainly does not seem to lack cause. For it is consistent with reason that the power of a planet is greater if it exists in the middle of a sign congruent with its nature, than if it is at its beginning or end. I see younger astrologers following Ptolemy, who teaches that planets are exalted in whole signs, conceding, however, that they are most exalted in the parts described here by the author. Regarding Triplicities: We distinguish triplicities as follows: All three signs that appear to agree in one nature form a triplicity, and are called by the same name, that is, Triplicity. Therefore, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius form the first triplicity, because each of these signs is fiery, masculine, diurnal, namely hot and dry, choleric, and bitter in taste. This triplicity is also oriental. Its lords are the Sun by day, and Jupiter by night, and Saturn is a participant by day and night. The second triplicity consists of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, because these are feminine, nocturnal, earthy signs, namely cold and dry, melancholic, and acrid in taste. This triplicity is meridional. The lords of this triplicity are Venus by day, and the Moon by night, of which Mars is a participant by day and night. The third triplicity consists of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, because these signs are masculine, diurnal, sanguine, namely hot, humid, airy, and sweet in taste. This triplicity is occidental. The lords of this triplicity are Saturn by day, and Mercury by night, of which Jupiter is a participant by day and night. The fourth triplicity consists of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, because these are feminine, nocturnal, northern, watery, phlegmatic, cold, humid, and salty in taste. The lords of this triplicity are Venus by day, and Mars by night, of which the Moon is a participant by day and night. Table of Houses, Exaltations, Joys, Triplicities, Detriments, and Falls of the Planets. Signs, Houses of the Planets, Exaltations, Joys, Triplicities, Detriments, Falls. Aries 19, Taurus 3, Gemini 21, Cancer 3, Leo 15, Virgo 27, Libra 19, Scorpio 3, Sagittarius 21, Capricorn 28, Aquarius 15, Pisces 27. The connection of three signs, which behold each other by trine aspect and have a similar nature, is commonly called a triplicity; the Greeks call it 'trigonon', Pontanus 'triangularity'. But someone might say, if this is true, what we asserted a little earlier, namely that the general constitutions of the signs agree with the temperament and qualities of the four seasons of the year, and that always three signs of each quadrant, following each other from one of the cardinal points, as far as their crassness is concerned, agree, it is in no way possible for signs placed in different quadrants, such as are proposed in trines, to have the same nature and similar power of action. I respond that the signs of one trine are not truly of the same nature in themselves, as far as the temperament attributed to the signs above is concerned, but they are nearly so, and as the author rightly says, whether he said it by chance or knowingly, they appear to be of the same nature, both because of their gender and similarity of figure, and the trine ray, they come together in a certain familiarity and society, and truly and most importantly, because they obey the same lords, whom he calls 'trigonokrators', that is, Triangulators, and are governed and ruled by them. For just as a master can accustom or compel three servants, one German, for example, another French, and a third Spanish, whose not only nationality, but also temperaments and customs are diverse in themselves, to agreement and friendship, or at least to a uniform and consistent handling of all affairs, so also three signs forming one trine, because of the obedience they equally render simultaneously to the same stars of the same sect, are compelled to one nature and the same power of action, even if they differ in their inherent nature and customs. There are four trines, one of which the Arabs call fiery, another earthy, a third airy, and a fourth watery. The fiery trine is formed by Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. For these signs, besides beholding each other by trine radiation, agree in two ways. First, by reason of similarity of form, for all are wild, quadrupedal, and fierce; then by nature, for all wish to be of the fiery nature, that is, hot and dry, masculine, diurnal, increasing choler or red bile, and bitter in taste. Hence, if at the time of birth or at the time of a question, one of these luminaries illuminates the ascendant, they say it mitigates the cold of winter, but causes immoderate heat in summer, especially if the lords or triangulators of the ascendant sign are present, or have occupied the trine elsewhere, or finally have strongly struck the ascendant from some angle of the figure. But in nativities, such a position inclines the native to fire and choler.

[Eastern Triplicity and Ptolemy's View]
The Arabs say that this first triplicity is Eastern. But Ptolemy is more to be believed, whose precepts are proven by arguments drawn from nature itself and by experience. Ptolemy teaches that this trigon is northern because of Sagittarius, the house of Jupiter, participating in some way with the west because of Aries, the house of Mars. So that the reason for this distribution may be clear, it should be known that Ptolemy attributes to each planet its own suitable region of the world: for example, to Saturn the east, which part, being diurnal and hot, reduces Saturn's cold to a certain temperateness. For a similar reason, he assigns Mars, the driest planet, to the humid and nocturnal western region. The north is assigned to Jupiter, because fertile winds usually break forth from this part. The star of Venus is familiar to the southern region because of its humidity. From this distribution, the luminaries are first excepted, because they are the general causes of winds; then Mercury, because he is perpetually present with and serves the luminaries. And since, according to Ptolemy's opinion, two planets preside over each trigon, as will soon be clear, it was entirely fitting to attribute not one, as the Arabs do, but exactly as many regions of the world to each trigon, from which the assigned rulers would be understood to excite their winds. As in the first trigon, Jupiter and Mars rule. Therefore, those parts from which Jupiter and Mars draw winds must be attributed to the first trigon. But since the Sun is, as we have said, the general mover of all winds, and cannot be attributed particularly to any one wind, Mars, being very similar to the Sun in nature and having a house in this trigon, is substituted in the Sun's place. Hence, a wind mixed from the boreal and occidental is collected, which Ptolemy calls Borrholibycus. For Jupiter brings northern winds, and Mars western winds, because this region is feminine, and Mars himself is of the sect of the Moon, which rules the west, just as the Sun rules the East. Ptolemy's words are these: "This trigon is primarily northern, because Jupiter exercises dominion there. For he is the author of blasts, and fertile, like the Aquilonian winds. But because of the house of Mars, Aphricus is mixed with it, and this trigon becomes Borrholibycus, that is, mixed from the north and Aphricus, because Mars excites Aphricus winds due to his familiarity, and because the western part is feminine." Ptolemy and the Arabs also disagree in the number and order of the triplicities. Ptolemy, since the seven planets were to be distributed conveniently among the four trigons, therefore assigned two planets to the first three trigons, and at least one to the fourth, as will be clear. The Arabs, however, make two principal lords for each trigon, one diurnal and the other nocturnal; and besides these, they add a third, participating in such dominion at both times. As in the first trigon, the Sun and Jupiter principally rule, to whom Saturn is added as a third participant in the dominion. But in nativities and the beginnings of other things, the diurnal lord is to be considered first in diurnal nativities, and the nocturnal lord in nocturnal nativities; then the remaining and participating lord. Therefore, if it is a diurnal nativity, and Leo is placed in the ascendant, for the nourishment of the native, according to the opinion of the Arabs, the lords of the Leonine triplicity should be considered, and in the first place the Sun, because it is a diurnal nativity, and afterwards Jupiter with Saturn as participant. Ptolemy, however, does not disagree with the Arabs in the ordering of the lords of the first triplicity, except that he postponed Saturn as a participant in both, and not without reason. For since Saturn is in detriment in Aries, it is not fitting for him to rule in the same trigon. Therefore, if three lords are absolutely required for each triplicity, the opinion of those who, rejecting Saturn, assume Mars as a participant seems more correct, which Ptolemy, however, rightly removes from the dominion of this diurnal triplicity because he is a nocturnal planet. For the dominion of a triplicity is nothing other than a certain power arising from the dignity of the house, exaltation, and sect, which the barbarians call Hayz. That is, in choosing the lords of the trigons, three things must be observed. First, that in diurnal trigons there are diurnal planets, and nocturnal planets in nocturnal trigons. Second, that masculine planets are referred to masculine trigons, and feminine planets to feminine trigons. Third, that since in every trigon there is one movable, one fixed, and finally one common sign, the ruler of the fixed sign is preferred to the others. Whatever planet has the greater testimony of suitability in these three is admitted to the office of triplicity ruler. Thus, because of the first two reasons, Mars is expelled from the first trigon, but because of the last reason, the Sun, the ruler of Leo, is preferred to Jupiter, etc. The earthy trigon is formed by Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, which signs, besides their gender and triplicity coherence, similarly agree in form, which is that of gentle and domesticated animals, except that to Virgo, because of Mercury's great power in that sign, human form is attributed, and then nature: for they are generally said to be cold and dry, melancholic, feminine, nocturnal, and acrid in taste. They also say that in the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries, if any of these, and especially Capricorn, illuminates the horoscope, the rigor of winter is greatly increased, especially if Saturn is found in that trigon.

[Southern Triplicity and Venus's Dominion]
This trigon is also southern according to Ptolemy's opinion, because of Venus's dominion in it, whose humidity and heat agree with the temperament of the southern region, participating in the east because of Capricorn, the house of Saturn, who, being of the Sun's sect, is judged to be the mover of eastern winds. The Moon, however, since she is a general producer of winds like the Sun, and cannot be attributed particularly to any one wind, is excluded from this particular administration, and Saturn is substituted for her because of his house, which he possesses in this trigon. We have already warned above that Mercury is also excluded everywhere with the luminaries for a certain reason. Therefore, these signs, because of Venus and Saturn, agreeing with the south and east, move winds mixed from the southern and eastern regions, which Ptolemy therefore calls Notapelioticus. Ptolemy's words are these: "This trigon is primarily southern, because of the dominion of Venus, whose star excites the winds of that part, because of the efficiency of heat and humidity. But when it also admits the subsolanus because of Saturn's dwelling in Capricorn, this trigon is constituted Notapelioticus, that is, mixed from the south and subsolanus, so that it is opposite to the first. For Saturn excites such winds, that is, eastern, since he is familiar with the east because of his solar condition." Ptolemy likewise assigns diurnal dominion here to Venus, nocturnal to the Moon, but neglects Mars as a participant.

[The Airy Trigon]
The third difference: The airy trigon consists of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. Their form is human and vocal. Their nature, in general, is hot and humid, sanguine, masculine, diurnal, and sweet in taste. If at that time, or if any of the luminaries ascend the horoscope from these signs, it is said to announce winds in that lunation. This trigon, according to Ptolemy, is oriental due to Saturn's maximum dominion in it, participating with the north because of Jupiter, who, as far as sect is concerned, agrees with Saturn. For it is diurnal and masculine. Therefore, the winds that arise from this triangularity will be between the north and the east, which they call borrascliolicus. Ptolemy's words on this matter are: "This trigon primarily agrees with the subsolanus because of Saturn. But by reason of mixture, it becomes borrapelioticus, that is, mixed from the north and subsolanus, because by name of condition it is reconciled to Saturn." The order of the trigon lords is the same in Ptolemy, except that he, as in all other trigons, neglects the third participant.

[The Watery Trigon]
The watery trigon connects the signs Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, whose form is that of aquatic and mute animals. For although Scorpio does not live in water, it lives in humid places. As for their nature, all are generally said to be cold and humid, phlegmatic, feminine, nocturnal, and salty in taste. Therefore, if any of these signs occupies the horoscope at the synod or diameter of the luminaries, they assert that rain is portended in that lunation, and indeed on that day when the Moon touches the horoscopant part, before the opposition if it was a conjunction figure, but before the conjunction whenever you judge from the opposition figure. Abraham Avenezra considers this to be most true, and if the horoscopant sign was one of the cardinal points of that earth figure. He calls the earth figure the theme of the world's revolution, which varies differently according to places. The same Abraham wrote: "If at the hour when the luminaries immediately precede the ingress into any of the aquatic signs, the horoscope is cast, and the luminaries themselves are in the angles, there will be excessive rain and heavy showers in that year."

[Watery Trigon Winds]
Furthermore, this trigon, according to Ptolemy, is western due to the dominion of Mars and the Moon, participating with the south because of Venus. Therefore, it also stirs up such winds, namely those collected from the western and southern regions, which they call notolybicus, that is, Austriaphricus. And Ptolemy says: "This triangle is primarily Aphricus because of the dominion of Mars and the Moon. But because of Venus, it becomes Notolybicum by mixture, that is, Austriaphricus." The Arabs want Mars and Venus to be the principal lords of this triangle, assigning Mars to the day and Venus to the night, with the Moon participating with both. In this, they differ from Ptolemy not in the number or diversity of stars, but only in their arrangement. Ptolemy established Mars alone as the principal triangulator for both day and night, and Venus and the Moon as participants, Venus by day and the Moon by night. His words are: "The fourth triangle, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, is left to Mars, who alone remains and claims his right because of his domicile. However, Venus and the Moon are joined to him as co-administrators, both because of their condition and because of the feminine signs, the Moon by night and Venus by day, etc."

[Trigon Lords Table]
Ptolemy's Triangulators: Day, Night, Participant. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius: Sun, Jupiter, Saturn. Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn: Venus, Moon, Mars. Gemini, Libra, Aquarius: Saturn, Jupiter, Sun. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces: Mars, Venus, Moon. Arab Triangulators: Day, Night, Participant. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius: Sun, Jupiter, Saturn. Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn: Venus, Moon, Mars. Gemini, Libra, Aquarius: Saturn, Jupiter, Sun. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces: Mars, Venus, Moon. Ptolemy's Trigons: North-West, South-East, North-East, South-West. Arab Trigons: North-West, South-East, North-East, South-West.

[Movable, Fixed, and Common Signs]
Four of these signs are also called movable, namely Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn. And four are fixed, namely Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius. The remaining four, namely Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, are common. They are called movable, fixed, or common because when the Sun enters one of them, time moves, that is, it changes; or it is fixed, that is, it perseveres in the same state; or it becomes common, that is, half of that one time will be like half of the other. For example: When the Sun enters the sign of Aries, time changes, that is, winter turns into spring. And when it enters Taurus, the same spring season is fixed. But when the Sun enters Gemini, the time becomes common, that is, half spring and half summer, and so on for the others. The present division and difference of the dodecatemoria is derived from the general constitution of the signs, which we explained in the first chapter above. For just as the four states of the seasons are not perpetually similar to each other, but each is distinguished by the increase, consistency, and decline of temperatures, so also the signs of each quarter, creating such a variety of time, have received their names from mobility, stability, and mediocrity. For example: Just as the entire spring season is distinguished into new, adult, and declining spring, so also the entire vernal quarter is divided into three signs of different appellations, the first of which is movable, the second fixed, and the third common. Similarly, one must judge concerning the remaining three quarters. For universally, the first four signs of the four seasons of the year are called movable: so called because the seasons of the year are changed by them. As when the Sun enters Aries, winter changes into new spring; Cancer, spring into summer; Libra, summer into autumn; Capricorn, autumn into winter. Tropical signs, according to Ptolemy, are subdivided so that some are equinoctial, namely Aries and Libra, which received their name from the thing itself, since at their beginning the Sun, being constituted, causes the equinox throughout the whole earth; others are tropical, namely Cancer and Capricorn, to which likewise the name is given from the thing itself. For the Sun, being constituted in them, turns away from us in Cancer, but towards us in Capricorn, and besides these, causes the vicissitude of days and nights. For when the Sun enters Cancer, the night, which was previously diminishing, now begins to increase; conversely, when the Sun reaches Capricorn, the days, which were previously continuously decreasing, now gradually begin to increase. Hence, from the remaining eight places of the signs, Ptolemy calls four sterea, that is, firm or fixed, and four disoma, that is, bicorporeal. Fixed are those that follow the tropical and equinoctial signs, namely Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, so called because in these the state of time is made firm and more vehement, not indeed because in Taurus the time is by its nature more temperate, or in Leo more ardent, but because human bodies, having already experienced that quality in a movable sign, feel the same as if unchanged and simpler due to the very delay in the fixed sign. Bicorporeal are those that are numbered after the fixed signs, namely Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, so called because they contain two bodies. For Gemini has two infants, Pisces as many animals, Sagittarius is composed of the body of a horse and a man. But the sign of Virgo, because it adheres to Libra, is called disomous. But the reason for this etymology is born from the accommodation of celestial images to the dodecatemoria. These same are called common because, being placed between the firm and movable signs, they share common natures with them.

[Differences in Signs]
They have differences, both those that precede and those that follow. Hence it is clear that the signs of each quarter are distinguished by such a reason and manner, just as the general constitution of each season of the year varies. If, however, all things are to be referred more curiously to the order which we proposed above from Ptolemy, it must be said that in this chapter certain simple properties of the signs are enumerated, peculiar to each dodecatemory by itself, or as Ptolemy says, the powers of the dodecatemories themselves, pure and unmixed. There are those who think that this division is taken from the mobility, stability, and moderate duration of things, which are begun by the ascendants themselves, or are signified by the planets placed therein. Hence those who have given precepts concerning elections, think that all things generally, which we wish to be fragile and weak, should be begun when the Moon is passing through some movable sign: but in more stable things and those that will endure longer, attention should be paid to the fixed signs: finally, in things that will last fewer years, indifferent and common signs are to be observed. But we do not care about such things. CONCERNING THE ASPECTS OF THE PLANETS. Signs are also said to aspect each other, that is: Every sign aspects the third before it, and the third after it, which is the eleventh. And this aspect is called sextile, and it is an aspect of affection and moderate friendship. And it is also called sextile because it holds the sixth part of the circle, that is, 60 degrees. For example: A planet that is at the beginning of Aries aspects the one that is in Gemini before it, and the one that is in Aquarius after it, which is an aspect of friendship. And it aspects the fourth before it and the fourth after it, that is, the tenth. And this aspect is called square, because it holds the fourth part of the sky, that is, 90 degrees. And it is an aspect of discord and moderate enmity.

[Schema of Aspects]
DIFFERENCE SCHEMA OF ASPECTS OR CONFIGURATIONS. A *오오 日 B an ६ This entire chapter is consumed with the treatment of the properties of the dodecatemories, which arise from their collation with each other, that is, from the mutual aspects of the signs. Aspects are intervals computed in the Zodiac, from which the stars communicate the greatest power. And although any star diffuses innumerable rays orbicularly: nevertheless, experience has shown that five of these, which are constituted by whole signs and whole parts of the entire circle, surpass the remaining multitude in efficacy. First, the sextile or hexagonal aspect is that which contains the sixth part of the Zodiac, that is, two signs or 60 degrees: as if the beginning of Cancer is A, from which 60 degrees are taken, contained between A and C. And if the line AC is drawn, it will be a sextile ray, which is noted!

[Aspects to Angles and Stars]
The angles of the houses of the sky, or to other wandering stars, are compared. If the comparison is made to the angles of the sky, then the dexter (right) aspects, which are carried against the order of the signs, are stronger than the sinister (left) aspects. For the stars are carried to the centers of the sky not by their own motion, but by the motion of the firmament. On the contrary, if the comparison is made to other stars, then the sinister aspects are to be preferred to the dexter, because the stars approach other stars not by an alien motion, but by their own motion. Ptolemy insinuated this distinction of rays to us in the treatise on life, and in book 4, chapter on dignity and honors. 6 Finally, by another division of aspects, one is called 'Platicus' when it is only from the signs, and the signs themselves aspect each other, etc. The other is 'Patilis', when from star to star as many parts of the sky are counted as constitute the configuration itself: that is, when the rays of the star are projected into similar parts of the aspecting sign. For example, if the Sun is in Aries 15°00', its square sinister ray will be in Cancer 15°, and dexter in Capricorn 15°. And its trine dexter in Sagittarius 15°, sinister in Leo 15°. Finally, the opposition in Libra 15°. This is to be understood of the minute parts of the sky: so that if the Sun were in Aries 9°47', all the said rays would fall into the 9°47' of the said signs. We have appended a compendium of all radiations, both dexter and sinister, and derived from each sign. RADIATIONS. * 0 Δ 8 dexter. * ++ 0 sinister 2 dexter. X 8 sinister mp mm sinister dexter. 213 sinister in dexter. mp 74 * Π Δ 8 II * 3 X - dexter. X dexter. 0 : sinister mp I sinister X 2 dexter. 44 X dexter. m sinister m sinister dexter. II 44 dexter. → m sinister. m ++ nil 4 0 II α dexter. Π dexter. ++ m sinister m ++ XX sinister 11 I. CONCERNING THE TERMS OF THE PLANETS. There are also terms or bounds of the planets in the signs: Because in each sign five planets have terms, arranged through different degrees. For from the beginning of Aries up to the sixth degree of the same Aries, is the term of Jupiter: and from the sixth up to the twelfth, the term of Venus: and from the twelfth up to the twentieth, the term of Mercury: and from the twentieth to the twenty-fifth, the term of Mars: and then to the end of the sign, that is, from the twenty-fifth to the thirtieth, the term of Saturn. However, because of the diversity of these degrees, which is not easy to remember, we have described them in a table, so that the work might be easier. H TER : Digitized by Google

[Egyptian Terms of Hermes]
DIFFERENCE OF THE EGYPTIAN TERMS, AND they are said to be of Hermes. Aries: Saturn 4, Jupiter 6, Venus 8, Mars 5, Jupiter 5. Taurus: Saturn 8, Mercury 6, Venus 8, Mars 5, Jupiter 3. Gemini: Saturn 6, Mercury 6, Venus 5, Mars 7, Jupiter 6. Cancer: Mars 7, Mercury 6, Venus 6, Jupiter 7, Saturn 4. Leo: Saturn 4, Mercury 5, Venus 7, Jupiter 6, Saturn 6. Virgo: Saturn 7, Mercury 10, Venus 4, Jupiter 7, Saturn 2. Libra: Saturn 6, Mercury 8, Jupiter 7, Venus 7, Mars 2. Scorpio: Mars 7, Mercury 4, Jupiter 8, Venus 5, Mars 6. Sagittarius: Saturn 12, Mercury 5, Jupiter 4, Venus 5, Mars 4. Capricorn: Mercury 7, Jupiter 7, Venus 8, Mars 4, Saturn 4. Aquarius: Venus 7, Jupiter 6, Saturn 7, Mars 5, Mercury 5. Pisces: Saturn 12, Jupiter 4, Saturn 3, Mars 9, Mercury 2. Terms Digitized by Google

[Nature and Distribution of Planetary Terms]
Terms or bounds, for it matters not by what name you call them, are peculiar parts of the sky, which in each sign are distributed for certain reasons among the five wandering stars, namely Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. For the two luminaries lack bounds, and in their place, they occupy the two halves of the zodiac, as has been said above. The Greeks call them τὰ ὅρια, and the lord of the bounds ὁριοκράτορα or τήν ὁρίων ἀρχήν. Since the degrees of the bounds are unequal in number and distributed to the planets in a somewhat unstable order, so that it is difficult to comprehend them by memory and very difficult to retain them: therefore, it seemed more useful and convenient to the author to present the planetary bounds depicted concisely in a table, rather than explained in a long discourse. However, their rationale seems to be as follows. The beginning of each sign is universally seized by that planet which has surpassed the others in the number of dignities in the same sign. But if this does not happen, and several planets have individual powers in the sign: then the triplicity ruler is always preferred to the lord of exaltation, and here to the lord of the house. However, this preeminence of dignities does not advance the malefics. For these are preferred only in the chariots of the Sun, and if they are deprived of this, they are not only expelled from the beginnings but also from the middle places of the signs and driven to the extremes. This is so true that Mercury in Aquarius holds the first parts solely by reason of the trine, while Saturn, having both the trine and domicile there, is not only repelled from primacy but also pushed to the extreme parts. And Mars occupied the beginning of Cancer for no other reason than that he is the sole lord of its trine; but of Scorpio, because of the trine and domicile. In Libra, however, Saturn was preferred to Mercury due to excessive power, having obtained exaltation there in addition to the trine. The beginnings of all other signs, as well as the intermediate places and those succeeding the beginnings, are free from the dominion of the malefics and are subject to the other planets by reason of the prerogatives already mentioned. For example, in the sign of Pisces, since Mars could not hold primacy solely by reason of the trine, Venus presides over the first parts due to exaltation; Jupiter, the lord of Pisces, follows her closely; then Mercury, who is completely peregrine. The malefics hold the extreme parts, and Mars, being the lord of the triplicity, precedes Saturn. In the sign of Aries, Jupiter occupies the first place due to the trine. Here, although neither Mercury nor Venus rule for any reason, yet due to power and beneficence, Venus is preferred to Mercury. Mars, the lord of Aries, has the penultimate place, with Saturn again pushed to the extremes. In Taurus, since Venus has the trine, she rightly presides over its first parts. Again, Jupiter and Mercury, although they do not rule here in any way: yet Mercury is preferred to Jupiter, because he has exaltation and domicile in the sign of Virgo, which is bound to Taurus by triplicity affinity, while Jupiter is completely alien to this trine. The malefics administer the extreme parts, with Saturn preceding Mars due to Capricorn. And so it must be judged for the rest. But why is Mercury preferred to Venus in Capricorn, when she exercises the right of the triplicity there, while he seems almost peregrine? Because, as we have already said, Mercury, due to Virgo, has almost greater power in that trine than Venus herself, to whom at least Taurus offers hospitality in addition to the trine; or because the ancients frequently experienced some significant power of Mercury at the beginning of Capricorn. It is also possible that Venus was substituted for Mercury, and Mercury for Venus, by scribes due to the similarity of the figures. Again, it can be asked, why does the right of the triplicity precede all other powers in the distribution of terms? To this hesitation, we must respond that the distribution of terms is almost like the division of judicial and other public offices in a polity. Therefore, just as in a well-constituted city, by the harmonious consent of the senate, suitable persons are placed in charge of the reins of government: so here too, the planets, exercising power in the signs of triplicity, which signifies consent, harmoniously divide among themselves the more important terms or bounds of dominion. Although the triplicity rulers are preferred to the other lords in this matter: nevertheless, they yield to those who have a throne in the signs, that is, more than one jurisdiction, and on that account, like tyrants, always occupy the best part by a certain violence. This is the reason for the order. However, we omit here the discussion of why the dominions of the terms are contained in an unequal number of parts, because it is more perplexing and involved in many ambiguities; and because I believe that the ancient Egyptians established

[Triplicities vs. Terms]
Some, however, prefer triplicities to terms, because the lords of triplicities are stronger in nourishment: because they signify nourishment, and because there is no discord in triplicity, as there is in terms when they are preferred. And some prefer terms to triplicities, because the lords of terms are stronger in direction. There is hesitation as to whether the power of trigons or bounds is greater. We respond by distinction: If a general comparison of these dignities is made, universally trigons precede terms. But if we compare them to certain matters, we will find other cases in which trigons are to be preferred to terms, and others in which they are to be postponed. As in the matter of nourishment, triangles are preferred to terms, and these in turn are preferred to triangles in the ordering of general chronocrators. He himself says the same thing, but in a more confused order, as it appears. Some, he says, prefer the right of triangularity to terms in two ways. First, and specifically with respect to certain matters, such as in the question of nourishment. For when the question, whether it is granted from heaven for the native to grow or not to grow, is proposed for explanation, then greater force must be attributed to triangles than to bounds. Indeed, the lords of triangles, as the Arabs please, signify nourishment. Second, and generally, as concerning a more evident, and therefore more certain cause, there is greater consensus among astrologers regarding the order of triangulators than regarding the order of chronocrators, since, as was seen in the preceding chapter, there is great contention as to which of the planets should precede in the power of the bounds in the signs. Again, he says that some specifically prefer bounds to triangles, because when we order the arbiters of times through progressions and transits of aphetic places, the efficacy of the stars holding the bounds is found to be greater than that of the triangulators. What directions and other progressions are, and how they are accomplished, we will explain below in a more opportune place.

[Decans and Planetary Strengths]
The faces of the signs are called Decans. There are three Decans for each sign, each of which exercises authority over ten parts of the 30 parts of any sign. The order of the Decans begins with Aries and Mars, and continues in order to the end of the zodiac according to the natural order of both signs and planets. For example, the first Decan is [Mars], the second [Sun], the third [Venus]. When this order is followed, the first Decan of Taurus is [Venus], the second [Mercury], the third [Moon]. Following this order, [Saturn] is admitted as the first Decan in the sign of Gemini, and similarly the following [planets] are placed over the following Decans. The method by which, given any degree of a sign, one can determine by calculation, without the aid of a table, which Decan the given degree obeys, is as follows: Count the number of signs from the beginning of Aries up to the beginning of the proposed sign. Then multiply the number of complete signs by three. Finally, to the number that arises from the triplication of the whole dodecatemoria, add the complete Decans of the proposed sign, along with the incomplete Decan whose lord is sought. This done, divide the sum by 7. And from what remains after the division, the first unit is assigned to Mars, the second, if present, to the Sun, and so on according to the natural order of the planets, until the progression reaches the last unit, that is, the lord of the incomplete Decan in question. For example, if it is proposed to investigate which Decan rules the 15th part of a sign, 6 must be multiplied by 3 (for from the beginning to the beginning, six complete signs are counted), which makes 18. To this, add 2 for one complete Decan and one incomplete Decan, making 20 Decans, which, divided by 7, leaves 6. Now, if the first unit of the remaining number is assigned to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus, the fourth to Mercury, the fifth to the Moon, the sixth incomplete Decan will finally reach Saturn, which the table also shows. Here are assigned certain co-workers or benefactors, who are three deities applied to each Decan. Also, certain images that arise with each Decan, called by the Greeks 'planatellonta', of which Ptolemy makes no mention, and, as I believe, he counts all of this chapter among the 'irrational arrangements and unreasoned causes'. Therefore, leaving these aside, let us proceed to those things that are not prepared for the sake of vain ostentation, but are confirmed by physical causes. The first chapter is about the virtues of the planets. And because now, with God's approval, we have discussed the powers of the planets in the signs, which are house, exaltation, triplicity, term, and face: Now therefore let us discuss their virtues or strengths in these themselves. For the lord of the house has five strengths, and the lord of the exaltation four, the lord of the triplicity three, the lord of the term two, and the lord of the face one. Understand therefore from this number the strengths of the planets. For those who abound more in number, abound more in strength. And some prefer the term to the triplicity, that is, they want the lord of the term to be stronger than the lord of the triplicity. But we have already explained above, in what each is valid. Some also gave such a comparison concerning this matter, saying that when a planet is in its house, it is like a man in his house and in his dominion. And when it is in its exaltation, it is like a man in his kingdom and glory. And when it is in its term, it is like a man among his parents and relatives and people. And when it is in its triplicity, it will be like a man in his honor, and among his helpers and ministers. And when it is in its face, it will be like a man in his mastery. These are the universal essential powers of the planets in the signs, and the figures of the signs follow these. And because the author has now established the universal familiarities of the stars and places, which they call the essential powers or dignities of the planets in the signs, as five in number, namely house, exaltation, trigon, term, and face. Since we have explained what each of these is, it is next to be said how great the force and power of each is, that is, how much strength and power each power can or cannot confer on the planets. And this is what the author says, that he will now discuss the virtues or strengths of the planets placed in these dignities themselves. Since the house is the noblest of all dignities, he therefore assigns five strength points to it. Next to this is the exaltation, and for this reason it is endowed with four points of strength. Then follows the trigon, distinguished by three points of power. After that, the dignity of the term, marked by two points. The last is the face, and for this reason signified by one point. This order of dignities is arranged in numbers so that we can more easily estimate and judge the magnitude of the strength or weakness of the stars, which they acquire in any place of the sky by their 'synoikeiosis' (familiarity), and thus more correctly choose the victorious and predominant planet. For we can declare that a star which we find to collect a greater number of strengths or powers in some place of the sky, overcomes the other stars in dominion in that place. For example, in the first six parts of Libra, when Saturn obtains 5 powers for its house, 4 for its exaltation, 3 for its trigon, and two for its terms, and thus easily surpasses all other wandering stars with a total of 14 powers: therefore, there is no doubt that Saturn is the ruler and victor in such a place. This order of dignities is general, and for this reason it should not be thought that it is observed everywhere consistently. For these dignities are accustomed to change their strength and powers in many ways with respect to the matters to be explained. Indeed, in matters concerning life, the house has more power than others; in honors and magistracies, the exaltation; in fortune and friends and popular glory, the trigon; in singular and proper matters, the term. And with this admonition, we have also provided a clear solution to the hesitation that the author raises here about the prerogative of trigons and terms. Furthermore, what the author says at the end of the chapter, that these are the universal essential powers of the planets in the signs, agrees with Ptolemy's doctrine and words, if you remove the face which he despised. For he also, as soon as he familiarized the stars with the dodecatemoria,

[Ptolemy on Dignities and Carpenta]
He shows that the familiarity of the house, exaltation, trigon, and terms are to be reconciled, rejecting faces, dodecatemoria, and other such subtle and empty divisions of rulerships. He concludes this same treatise with similar words, saying: "The familiarities of the stars and the dodecatemoria are such," that is, the familiarities of the stars and places are almost in this manner. The difference, however, is in this, that the author said all, but Ptolemy said almost all, indicating by the particle "almost" that besides those already mentioned, there are still other familiarities of signs with stars. These are three, which he immediately adds in the same place, namely, the carpentum, the persona, and the joy, which we explained above when discussing the domiciles of the planets. The persona will be discussed below in the third difference. As for the carpentum, we read that Ptolemy wrote about it in this manner: "And they are said to be in their own splendors, and on thrones and in their own chariots, when two or more of the aforementioned modes of familiarity are found to be associated with the places in which they are found. For then their powers are especially increased for action, due to the similarity and cooperative nature of the dodecatemoria's innate familiarity, and they are said to be enthroned and to shine." That is, they are said to be placed in splendors, and as if carried in royal chariots and carpenta, and to sit on thrones, and to be adorned with such excellences, when they have a right to those places in which they are found, by two or more of the modes of familiarity already explained above. For when their powers are especially increased for action, due to the similarity of the dodecatemoria, as far as innate properties are concerned, and the cooperative action of the same, then they are said to sit on their own thrones and to shine. From these words of Ptolemy, it is clear that the carpentum is not a simple dignity, but one composed of other simple dignities. For he wants a planet to achieve carpentum only when it is in a place related by two or more modes of association. For example, when Mercury is within the first seven degrees of Virgo, it obtains three simple dignities, namely, house, exaltation, and terms. Therefore, placed in such a place, it is said to be carried in a carpentum and to sit on its own throne. Thus, Jupiter in the first twelve degrees of Sagittarius, where it possesses house, trigon, and terms, as if in its own throne or carpentum, triumphs, etc. Ptolemy says that the power of planets sitting on their own thrones, that is, their faculty of action, is excellently increased for two reasons. The first is the similarity of properties innate to both signs and planets, which doubles the planet's power of action, and this is the efficient cause. The second is the cooperative nature of the dodecatemoria, that is, the proper power of the signs, which helps to perfect the action of the present stars. And this is the material cause of the effects. From this, it follows that signs empty of planets are not idle, but by their inherent power, they foreshadow those effects which the stars related to them accomplish. But now let us conclude this section with a brief repetition of what we have said, namely, that according to Ptolemy, there are seven kinds of dignities, or modes by which stars are reconciled to places in the sky: namely, house, exaltation, trigon, and terms, persona, joy, and carpentum. Of these modes, the first six are pure or simple; the last, however, is composed of simple ones. Finally, of the simple ones, the first four, concerning whose prerogative among themselves we have already spoken, are principal. The other two are less principal, with persona preceding joy. From this, it follows that the carpentum is to be considered the first and most noble of all, while joy is the last and weakest of all. Concerning that similarity, by which the author, according to the common opinion of astrologers, institutes a comparison of the house to dominion, and of exaltation to kingship, etc., there exists not only the judgment of the most celebrated man Cardano, but also a most beautiful exposition of all these dignities, explaining what each can do in any matter. Therefore, we have taken care to include his entire passage on this matter here. He says, "It must be seen what each of these can do, and not like Haly, who compares house to house, exaltation to kingdom, and explains the powers of dignities in such a way that you know as much after reading what he writes about them as you did before. Therefore, one must pay attention, since this is a most excellent tradition, and discovered by us through long observation and subtle reasoning. Nor should we be less grateful to Haly, who, besides what he could do, provided us with the cause for inquiring into the truth. Therefore, a carpentum is when a planet is, as it were, in all its joy and in all its dignity. For one born with such a significator is loved and honored by his own and by strangers, everything is deferred to him, believed, he leads a tranquil life, arranges everything with a certain ease, so that he truly deserves to be called fortunate. But when a planet is in its house, one born under its disposition will have perpetual power, and without noise, people will spontaneously obey him: they lead a tranquil life, and show a certain perpetual efficacy of that planet: if it is Mercury, of study and negotiation; if it is Venus, of grace and charm; if Jupiter, of probity and administration; if the Sun, of dignity and majesty; if Mars, of audacity and promptness, fortitude, anger; if Saturn, of moroseness, stability, cunning, obstinacy, solicitude; if the Moon, of desire for journeys, and handling other people's affairs. But if you refer to general constitutions, you will see the same similarity. For if Saturn is in its houses and rules, the times will generally be cold and dry, with a fixed and strong coldness: and if it is summer, the times will be perpetually temperate. If Jupiter, the time will be serene, pleasant, beautiful, broad, with moderate and pleasing winds. And if Mars, the time will be very arid and very dry; if the Sun, the time will be very hot, with few rains however; if Venus, everything will be mild, sweet, rainy; if Mercury, everything will be varied and inconstant and changeable, so that it never remains in the same tenor for three continuous days; if the Moon, the time will be cloudy, rainy, inconstant and heavy. If anyone asks, whence is this from Ptolemy? I answer, Ptolemy taught us this expressly, that the action of the Sun is to be imitated in all things. Therefore, when it is in Leo, it causes the greatest heat and rules equally. But Leo is the Sun's house, indeed, its carpentum and throne (but the ratio of trigons should hardly be counted among the parts of the carpentum, since it depends on the house and exaltation), therefore the Sun's power in Leo proceeds from its domicile. By the same reasoning, exaltation itself is understood. For the dignity of exaltation in private nativities brings new and not perpetual powers, and more among strangers than among one's own, and produces a restless kind of life. Therefore, exaltation is not to be compared to the house in terms of tranquility, or duration, or ease. But because it is new and unusual: Defense

[The Nature of Signs and Their Meanings]
72. DIFFERENCE. It brings unexpected and almost unhoped-for advantages, and is considered more illustrious by most people. For humans tend to admire the unexpected more, even if weaker and smaller, than the usual and greater things. Who would not marvel more at an inheritance of four thousand crowns received from a stranger, than at a son succeeding his father to thirty thousand? And this is the reason why many have preferred altitude to house. Therefore, in general constitutions, when the Sun enters Aries, its exaltation, it moves the whole world, everything sprouts, everything is cheered, yet it does not heat as in Leo, nor even as in Cancer or Taurus. And to say it in one word, the house makes a thing quiet and perpetual, the exaltation in change and a greater appearance. The trine, however, has more virtue in dividing regions of the earth than in nativities. In nativities, it signifies strength and efficacy, and the mandates of that person are received by people, if he presides, or his counsels, if he is an associate. The terms declare more powerful forces, but limited by times, such as embassies, annual magistracies, and singular affairs. In times, however, changes are not general, but those that end in a few days or months. Hence, terms, because they receive an end, are called days. Qualities, however, polish both mind and body, they do not create them. Hence, he who has the lord of manners in the terms of Mars or Saturn, may indeed be otherwise good, but with rude, rustic, and unkempt manners. In bodily affections too, the term alleviates or increases evil, it does not create it. The person makes it appear and represent a species, not that it is. Joy, however, alleviates or exacerbates the significations, but is barely felt. This is Cardan's view. CONCERNING THE ESSENCES OF THE SIGNS, AND what they signify in themselves. Because in the signs there are certain signs that are called rational, namely, Virgo, Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, the first half of Sagittarius, because their images in the circle are figured as images of humans. These are also called signs having beautiful voices. These also thrive when they are in the East. And some are called winged, namely Gemini, Virgo, Pisces. And some are quadrupedal, like Leo, Sagittarius. Some of them are domestic, like Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, these thrive when they are in the South. Virgo, however, and Capricorn and Aquarius thrive when they are in the North. And among the signs, some are tortuous and vicious, namely, Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Capricorn. And some of them are said to have many offspring, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, and these thrive when they are in the West. And some of them are sterile, like Gemini, Leo, and Virgo. And some have few children: like Aries, Taurus, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Aquarius. And some are said to be very luxurious: namely Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn. And among the signs, some are said to have a medium voice, which are formed in the images of bleating, bellowing, and roaring animals, like Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn, the last part of Sagittarius. And some are voiceless, namely those formed in the images of voiceless animals: namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. This title: Concerning the essences of the signs, and what they signify in themselves, seems to indicate that these differences of the signs, which are discussed in this chapter, should be referred to the simple and naturally inherent properties of the dodecatemoria. But if we wish to examine the matter more accurately, we will find that they are not entirely simple, but rather derived from the fixed stars, and from the connection of the images of the eighth sphere. And this is the reason why, at the end of the preceding chapter, after the completed discussion of the dignities of the planets in the signs, or rather of the reconciliation of the planets with the natural temperament of the dodecatemoria, it says that the figures of the signs follow, or as it is said more clearly in Greek, τὰ μορφώματα τοῦ ζῳδίου, that is, the appellations accommodated to the dodecatemoria from the adjacent forms of the signs. And immediately at the beginning of this chapter, it says that the dodecatemoria of Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, and the first half of Sagittarius are called human because the images connected to these signs are figured in the likeness of a human image. This was especially true in the time of the ancients and Ptolemy, when, as has been copiously explained above, not only did the head of the starry Aries coincide with the vernal intersection, but also the entire image of the same Aries was joined to the Arian dodecatemorion, and in the same way the subsequent images in the eighth sphere coincided entirely with the dodecatemoria following in the outermost sphere. But in our time, since the first star of Aries has receded 17 parts and a little more from the vernal equinox, and all the other constellations have made similar progressions εἰς τὰ ἐπόμενα, it is clear that, having abandoned the dodecatemoria they once occupied, they have almost entirely migrated into the succeeding dodecatemoria. For example, the image or sign of Aries of the eighth sphere has for the most part been transferred into the dodecatemorion of Taurus of the outermost sphere, and similarly the Taurine image of the eighth sphere has proceeded into the dodecatemorion of Gemini of the outermost sphere, and the image of Gemini into the Cancerian dodecatemorion. Therefore, the dodecatemorion of Gemini, for example, which was once called a human sign with the added image of Gemini, can no longer be correctly called human, but rather quadrupedal; and the Cancerian dodecatemorion, once named reptilian from the connected image, will now be more correctly called human because of the ingress of the image of Gemini. For there is no doubt that such a translation of the things themselves must follow the translation of the appellations that the dodecatemoria assume from the images of the eighth sphere. This must be observed more diligently, lest by abusing these appellations as if they were constantly inherent in the dodecatemoria, we fall into a very gross error. Haly wrote these words to the same effect: Many things, he says, the ancients told you about the signs, but it is fitting that you accept from their sayings that which agrees with Ptolemy's opinion, because he alone is the one who follows the natural thing. For he holds that each sign has its separate power, because of the fixed stars existing in each sign. And for this reason, it is fitting that you inspect.

[Ptolemy's Dodecatemoria and Fixed Stars]
FIRST. You will judge which stars belong to which sign, and according to this, you will judge. And when you have done this, you will naturally have followed this art, and you will be in agreement with Ptolemy's opinion. For it is fitting that you do this, and dismiss all other sayings, and not lose yourself, like one who wants to take many paths and does not know which is certain. And thus you will not go astray, like one who does not know what is truth and what is not. But Ptolemy's words, by which he teaches that the appellations of the dodecatemoria are derived from the adjacent figures of the fixed stars, are these: "But they also applied other appellations to the dodecatemoria, taken from the figures of the stars, for example, quadrupedal and terrestrial, and ducal, and fertile, and so named. Which appellations, since they are evident from their figures, we deem it superfluous to enumerate here. The qualities of such forms, insofar as their powers are useful in judgments, have been expounded by us." By this text of Ptolemy, we are usefully and very timely admonished that the enumeration of appellations, which the places of the heavens take from the adjacent images of living things, by which the entire machinery of the world is distinguished, is by no means necessary: since it is easy to understand the powers of each from its form or figure: especially, however, since, as he himself testifies here, insofar as they can or should be usefully considered in judgments, it has been sufficiently expounded in its proper places. Ptolemy did this in Book 1, Chapter on the powers of the fixed stars, and throughout all the books of the Apotelesmatics. Haly is of the opinion that it is superfluous to enumerate these differences of the signs, because they are inconstant, and are changed over longer periods due to the transit of figures into succeeding places. For the same reasons, the author also, as it seems, distinguishes at least twelve principal figures, which are interwoven with the zodiac, in this chapter as an example with various appellations. "Human or anthropomorphic signs" are those in which human effigies are found, such as Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, and the middle part of Sagittarius. The author and Haly also include Libra among the human signs, because of its proximity to Virgo, I think. Why Gemini and Virgo are called "winged," that is, having wings, the painting of the globes sufficiently indicates. But the "gills" of Pisces are like wings. However, I do not remember having read in Ptolemy that the figures of Pisces and Gemini are called winged, who, when he speaks of winged creatures, for example, names Virgo and Sagittarius with a hen. "Quadrupedal" signs are Taurus, Leo, and the last part of Sagittarius. And two of these, namely Leo and Sagittarius, are "wild" or untamed: the rest, however, are "tame" or domestic. The author adds that human signs are also called vocal, and the same in the east: but quadrupedal signs exert greater power in the south than in other quadrants, with Virgo, Aquarius, and Capricorn being more in agreement with the North. In general, however, the figures as well as the appellations of all signs took their origin from their natural effects, which they impress upon the subjects and those things that particularly agree with them. As in general constitutions, human signs signify events that will turn out for the human race, and those of other figures for similar brutes and similar things: which Ptolemy expounded more fully in Book 3, Chapter 7, on the kind of events. In nativities also, human signs bestow sociability, gentleness, and civil custom upon the natives. On the contrary, those that have the names of wild beasts, such as Leo, engender inhospitality, savagery, insolence, and rapacity. But those that are called domestic, indeed add gentleness to the native, but with a certain humility and abjection. To this belongs that saying of Hermes: "Whoever does not have the rulers of his nativity or the ascendant in human signs, will be alienated from humanity even to himself." In the same way, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces are called tortuous, vicious, and morbid signs, because they inflict upon the natives humps, lameness, dislocations, ulcers, and such calamities. Ptolemy calls them "afflicted signs": "especially," he says, "when the Moon is in the nodes or flexures, or in the afflicted signs, such as Cancer and Pisces, there occur bodily defects of humps, lameness, and dislocations." And there a little further down, where he speaks of judgments of diseases from the signs of the eighth sphere: "Specifically," he says, "Cancer, Capricorn, and Pisces, and generally all creeping and aquatic signs, particularly cause diseases of ulcers that consume flesh and creeping skin diseases, scrofula, fistulas, leprosy, and such diseases." Similarly, "fertile signs," that is, those having many offspring, such as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, have found their name from their effect. He says that these are strong in the west, while "sterile signs" are Aries and Leo. Furthermore, he seems to wrongly enumerate Gemini among the sterile signs, since their image is "two-bodied," and for this reason, according to Ptolemy in Book 4, Chapter on children, it multiplies the number of children. But the six remaining signs, namely Taurus, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Aquarius, since they have a middle nature in this matter, are not improperly called signs of few children. Similarly, since the signs of men are called vocal: but Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces are mute: the rest, namely Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorn, and the last part of Sagittarius, are not undeservedly left to a middle nature. These are the differences of the twelve signs interwoven with the zodiac. The principal ones of the rest that are situated outside the Zodiac, whose use Ptolemy shows in their proper places, are almost these: "Signs of birds," such as the eagle and the hen: "Aquatic signs," such as the dolphin and Pisces: "Shipwrecked signs," such as Argo and the ship: "Poisonous signs," such as Scorpio and serpents: "Mutilated signs," such as Taurus and the head of Medusa: "Bound signs," such as Andromeda and Cepheus: "Ducal signs," such as both the northern and southern crowns. All these can be reduced to a compendium in this way. Some images are of animals, others of things. Of things, such as ducal, like both crowns: and shipwrecked, like Argo. Furthermore, of animals, some are flying in the air or winged, such as the eagle and the hen: others are swimming in the waters: and of these again, some are called marine, such as the dolphin: and others are called fluvial, such as the fish.

[Planetary Influence on Body Parts by Sign]
and what follows, Mars the chest and what follows, the Sun the shins. Digitized by Google. FIRST. 85. And the shins and ankles, that is, the heels, Venus the neck, Mercury the head, Luna the thighs. Luna the thighs of a man in Cancer, Saturn the genitals and all that follows them, Jupiter the thighs, Mars the chest, the Sun the feet, Venus the arms and shoulders, Mercury the eyes and throat, Luna the head. In Leo, Saturn the private parts and what follows, Jupiter the thighs and knees, Mars the belly, the Sun the head, Venus the heart, Mercury the shoulders and throat, Luna the neck. In Virgo, Saturn the feet, Jupiter the knees and what follows them, Mars the belly, the Sun the neck, Venus the belly, Mercury the heart, Luna the shoulders. In Libra, Saturn the knees and what follows them, Jupiter the eyes and what follows them, that is, parts of the head, Mars the private parts and what follows them, the Sun the shoulders, Venus the head, Mercury the belly, Luna the heart. In Scorpio, Saturn the ankles, that is, the heels, and what follows them, Jupiter the feet, Mars the head, arms and thighs, the Sun the heart, Venus the private parts and what follows them, Mercury the back, Luna the belly. In Sagittarius, Saturn the feet, Jupiter the shins and head, Mars the feet and hands, the Sun the belly, Venus the thighs and arms, Mercury the private parts and heart, Luna the back. In Capricorn, Saturn the head and feet, Jupiter the knees and eyes, Mars the shins and shoulders, the Sun the back, Venus the thighs and heart, Mercury the private parts and what follows them, Luna the thighs. In Aquarius, Saturn the head and neck, Jupiter the shoulders, chest and feet, Mars the ankles and heart, the Sun the private parts and what follows them, Venus the knees and what follows them, Mercury the thighs and heart, Luna the private parts. In Pisces, Saturn the shoulders, arms and neck, Jupiter the heart and head, Mars the ankles and belly, the Sun the thighs and what follows them, Venus the neck and back, Mercury the shins and private parts, Luna the genitals. In the previous chapter, the agreement of the signs with the body parts was shown; in this one, it wants to indicate the parts of the body that the wandering stars affect as they pass through the signs. For example, if Saturn is placed in the sixth house of the nativity, which signifies illness, threatening infirmity to the native, then according to this rule, if Saturn is in Aries, the chest will be in danger; if in Taurus or Gemini, the belly; if in Cancer, the genitals and all that follows them, etc. For greater ease of use, we have included a summary in the following figure. ARIES, chest and belly. back. head and neck. thighs and knees. TAURUS, belly. GEMINI, belly. private parts and what follows. Chest and what follows. shins and ankles. feet. head. neck. shins. feet. head. knees. shins. thighs. CANCER, genitals and all that follows them. thighs. FIRST. LEO, private parts and what follows them. thighs and knees. VIRGO, feet. knees and what follows them. belly. chest. belly. feet. head. arms and shoulders. heart and belly. neck. eyes and throat. shoulders and throat. heart. neck. shoulders. LIBRA, knees and what follows them. eyes and what follows them. private parts and what follows them. shoulders. head. belly. heart. SCORPIO, ankles and what follows them. feet. head, arms and thighs. heart. private parts and what follows them. back. belly. SAGITTARIUS, feet. shins and head. feet and hands. belly. thighs and arms. private parts and heart. back. CAPRICORN, head and feet. knees and eyes. shins and shoulders. back. AQUARIUS, head and neck. PISCES. shoulders, chest and feet. shoulders, arms and neck. heart and head. ankles and heart. ankles and belly. private parts and what follows them. thighs and what follows them. thighs and heart. knees and what follows them. neck and back. thighs and heart. shins and private parts. genitals. private parts and what follows them. thighs. The reason for this division, by which parts of the human body are distributed to the planets as they pass through all the signs, appears to be as follows. To each planet, its own house, which first occurs after Aries in the subsequent signs, is assigned the first part of the human body, namely the head. If the same planet then passes through the sign next to that house in the subsequent signs, it will also affect the second part of the human body, and the part closest to the head, that is, the neck, and similarly, as it travels through the subsequent signs, it will take care of the subsequent parts of the human body, whose order has been explained above. For example: since Capricorn is the house of Saturn, and indeed the one that first occurs when counting from Aries in the subsequent signs, therefore Saturn, when placed in Capricorn, will take care of the head; in Aquarius, the sign immediately following Capricorn, the part closest to the head, namely the neck; in Pisces, the shoulders and arms; in Aries, the chest; and in such an order, in the subsequent signs, it will affect the subsequent parts of the human body. Not only to the twelve signs of the zodiac and the seven planets, but also to the twelve stations of the sky described below, some have been accustomed to distribute the parts of the human body in a completely similar manner, and just as Aries is the first among the signs, so the ascendant, the first of the twelve houses, is considered to occupy the first part of the body, namely the head. For this reason, to the second house, the second part of the body, namely the neck, is attributed, and similarly to the remaining subsequent houses, the remaining subsequent parts of the body. This seems to be derived from the 74th aphorism of the Centiloquium, whose words are these: "Whoever has Mars ascending will certainly have a scar on his face." Therefore, what the ascendant, the first house of the natal chart, can do for the head, the first part of the body, I believe it has been judged that the second house can similarly achieve and exercise for the neck, the second part of the body, and the subsequent houses for the subsequent parts. These are the reasons why we see most astrologers insist on detecting and pronouncing the places of diseases and defects determined by the stars. But Ptolemy, as we can clearly see from his words in Book 3, Chapter on bodily defects and diseases, of his Apotelesmatics, thought somewhat differently and made conjectures about the places and qualities of future diseases and defects from more serious causes. "Here," he says, "for a general understanding, we must look at the two centers of the horizon, that is, the eastern and western, but especially at the one that is itself moving and at the one that is not fixed to the eastern center, observing how the maleficent stars are configured to it. For if they are positioned in the ascending degrees of the aforementioned places, either bodily or quadratically, or diametrically, or if such a place or both are afflicted, then bodily affections are to be suspected in the natives, especially if either of the luminaries, or both, are angular in the manner we have said, or diametrically opposite. For then, not only if one of the malefics is ascending, but also if one of the luminaries is ascending, being angular itself, it is sufficient to dispose to one of the aforementioned conditions, whatever the places of the horizon and the signs indicate together with the affection, and the natures of the stars, both those that cause harm and those that are harmed, and also those that are configured with them. For each of the parts of the zodiac that contain the afflicted part of the horizon will indicate the part of the body." S T

[Great Conjunctions and Ptolemy's View]
Thus far, he has explained those things which contribute to understanding the nature of the celestial spaces and the power of celestial bodies. In the following, he will enumerate all the names of astrologers, including the aphetic and anaretic places, and the profections, directions, and other revolutions of the aphetic places. The first chapter is named after the six great conjunctions, which, I believe, received their name from the rarity and magnitude of the accidents they produce, such as wars, plagues, earthquakes, floods, and similar effects, which are believed to occur with great delay and evidence. Indeed, the first and greatest of all, the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, celebrated at the beginning of Aries, is said to return every 960 years and generally dispose of the same times. Similarly, the second conjunction, which is the transit of the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter from one trigon to another, occurs every 240 years. The third, which is the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter at the beginning of Cancer, occurs every 30 years. The fourth, which is the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in any sign, occurs every 20 years. The fifth place is held by the true return of the Sun to the point of the vernal equinox, or, as they commonly say, the Sun's ingress into the first point of Aries. The last and least of these is the synod or diameter of the luminaries. Besides these, there are many other smaller and lesser conjunctions, nearly 120, a catalog of which Haly and Pontanus enumerate in the aforementioned 50th chapter of the Centiloquium. Furthermore, that the author says the greatest conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter returns every 960 years, and the second every 240 years, is very variable, and can only be true if we assume that the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter returns every 20 years, and proceeds annually by 2425 parts, that is, by 8 signs and two and a half parts. For example, if the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter first begins at the beginning of Aries, then after 20 years from the root, according to this thesis, the second conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter will be in 2 degrees, 30 minutes of Leo. The third, after 40 years from the root, in 5 degrees, 2 minutes. The fourth, after 60 years, in 7 degrees, 30 minutes. The fifth, after 80 years, in 10 degrees. The sixth, after 100 years, in 12 degrees, 30 minutes of Scorpio. The seventh, after 120 years, in 15 degrees of Sagittarius. The eighth, after 140 years, in 17 degrees, 30 minutes of Capricorn. The ninth, after 160 years, in 20 degrees of Aquarius. The tenth, after 180 years, in 22 degrees, 30 minutes of Pisces. The eleventh, after 200 years, in 27 degrees, 30 minutes of Aries. The twelfth, after 220 years, in 36 degrees, that is, in 6 degrees of Leo. Therefore, after 240 years from the root, this great conjunction will migrate from the fiery trigon to the earthy trigon, for it will be at the end of 30 degrees of Pisces, that is, at the beginning of Taurus, and likewise in this earthy, as they call it, triangularity, it will remain for 240 years, and in the same bodies, Saturn and Jupiter will similarly conjoin twelve times. Therefore, if you multiply 12 by 20, you will again get 240 years, after which the great conjunction will pass to the beginning of Gemini, and again, after exactly 240 years, it will come to the beginning of Cancer, and will remain in its trigon for 240 years; and finally, after a total of 960 years, it will return to the beginning of Aries, that is, to the fiery triangularity. It will therefore remain in each trigon for 240 years. And since there are 4 trigons, multiply 4 by 240, which will be 960 years, after which the greatest conjunction, changing from the watery trigon, will return to Aries, from where it first departed. But it appears that this hypothesis of astrologers is false. For the minor conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter occurs not every 20 years, but every 19 years and 315 days, 19 hours. And the process is by 243 degrees, 59 minutes, 18 seconds, 9 minutes, 19 seconds, that is, by 8 signs, 2 degrees, 59 minutes, 18 seconds, 9 minutes, 2 seconds. And so in one and the same nature of the trigons, as if from one to another, not, as the author seems to want, by 2 degrees, 30 minutes, 14 seconds, but proceeding by almost three parts. From which it is clear that the two superiors in one trigon do not, as is written here, meet twelve or thirteen times, but at least ten times, and thus that great conjunction in one and the same trigon does not persist for 240 common years, but at least 198 and a little less than one year. But we believe that a more extensive discussion and deeper inquiry into this matter neither pertains to our purpose nor to the true substance of the art; since the doctrine concerning great conjunctions, although both the learned and the unlearned vulgar equally rush into it, can be proven to be partly plainly erroneous, and partly not of such great importance as is thought, by arguments of fact and the authority of Ptolemy, who, at the beginning of the second book of the Apotelesmatics, explaining the general prognostic parts of astronomy, transferred both the foreknowledge of regions and cities, to which the significations of great events are directed, and their times, to the sole eclipses of the luminaries, making no mention of great conjunctions. His words are these: "For the general examination of cases, two things are especially taken into account: the dodecatemoria of the zodiac, and furthermore the familiarity and sympathy of the stars with each of the climes, and the significations of effects that occur in their proper parts at the proper time, according to the conjunctions of the Sun and Moon, and according to the transits of the wandering stars around their risings and stations. Therefore, before all things, we will explain the natural causes of the aforesaid sympathy, at the same time briefly recounting the bodily and moral peculiarities of all nations, which are not alien to the natural constitution of both the dominant stars and the places of the zodiac to which they are subject." And further down he says again: "There is no prior or more powerful cause of such cases than that which is derived from the eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and the transits of the stars at that time." But someone might say that this text of Ptolemy rather extols and strengthens the doctrine of great conjunctions than abolishes it, since the power of producing great and general events is attributed not only to the eclipses of the luminaries, but also to the transits of the wandering stars? I answer that, although Ptolemy, in general mutations, attributes power to the superior planets equally with the rest of the multitude of astrologers, he does not do so to the same extent, nor in the same way as they themselves think about their power. For they primarily observe the conjunctions of Jupiter and Saturn for discovering the times and places of great events, to which something is signified, and extend their effect for many centuries. But Ptolemy, on the contrary, considers the times and places.

[On Compotent Degrees]
DIFFERENCE. Fortunate. Unfortunate. Fortunate. Unfortunate. 4 7 26 4 7 4 25 1 15 4 26 2 13 4 27 2 20 2 25 2 7 2 24 14 24 18 12 28 12 ++ 25 22 ++ 26 m 15 P 25 ++ 13 p 26 ++ 9 X 26 p X 28 21 14 X 9 X 13. ON COMPOTENT DEGREES. And two degrees, which are of the same longitude from the head of the movable signs, are called compotent, that is, of the same strength, and partners or participants in virtue, as the 20th degree of Capricorn or Cancer with the 10th degree of Sagittarius or Gemini, the 20th degree of Aries or Libra with the 10th degree of Pisces or Virgo. Parts equally removed from the four cardinal points, generally called by the common people compotent degrees, or degrees of the same strength and power, the Greeks were accustomed to call τὰ ἀντίσκια μέρη. These are distinguished by Ptolemy in such a way that parts equally removed from the tropical points on both sides are called βλέποντος καὶ ίime μoντo, that is, beholding and equally powerful: but parts receding equally from the equinoctial points are properly and learnedly called προςκατοντσο καὶ ἀκής or, that is, commanding and obedient. The words of Ptolemy concerning commanding and obedient places are these:

[Ptolemy on Commanding and Obedient Places]
FIRST. They are: προςάποντα καὶ ἀκέοντα Λέγονη τμήματα τὰ κατ' ἴσίω διάςασιμ ἀχὶ τῷ αὐτε όποτορα του ισημερινών σημείωμ ακμαν libr.t.capt Ειλόμλια, δια τὸ ἐμοῖς ἴσοις χρόνοις αναφορες δέτε᾽ ἴωμ πραλ πυρί προς λάλωμ. τότωμ δὲ τὰ μεν οὐ τους θερινῷ ἡμικυκλίῳ προς άοσοντα και σαυτόνο λίτη, τα δ' ἐμ το χειμερινῷ ὑπακοντα: 21ὰ τὸ κατ' ἐκεῖνο μή γινό τωμα- μενου τόμ Ο μείζονα ποιεῖμ τνυκτὸς τὸ ἡμέραμ, κατὰ το δεές καόντωμ λάζω: that is, Commanding and obedient places are said to be those which are at an equal distance from one or both of the equinoctial points, and this is because they rise in an equal space of time and describe the same parallel circles. Moreover, those which are in the summer part of the sphere are called commanding, and those which are in the winter half are called obedient, because the Sun makes the days longer there, and the nights longer here. In this text, Ptolemy teaches us both the causes of familiarity between commanding and obedient places, and why the latter are subject to the former. He states one cause of familiarity to be that such places, being at equal intervals from the equinoctial points, have equal anaphoras or ascensions, as they call them, which is clear and known from the first spherical institutions, and the use of the anaphora table described by us below easily indicates the same. For example, in our altitude, that is, of the city of Agrippina, which is 51 parts, both dodecatemoria, namely and X, when equally receding from the vernal intersection, in their rising draw with them from the equinoctial 13 parts, 21 scruples, which converted into time make 0 hours, 57 scruples. Thus and rise equally with 17 parts, 25 scruples, that is, one temporal hour, and 14 scruples. In the same way, we must judge concerning the remaining dodecatemoria equally removed from the intersection, whether vernal or autumnal. He states another cause of association between the said parts to be that they describe equal parallel circles, which is equally easily established. For if four points are taken equally removed from the equinoctial intersection on both sides, the lines connecting the assumed points will be both equal to each other and equally removed from the diameter of the ecliptic, and will be equidistant from it by the 14th of the third element of Euclid, and will delineate parallel circles entirely equal to each other during one revolution of the world. But why are the northern places more powerful and nobler than the southern?

[Commanding and Obedient Signs]
DIFFERENCE. are nobler than the southern? He answers that since day is nobler than night and more suitable for action, therefore the places of the zodiac signs which bring an increase of days are deservedly called commanding, and the remaining ones in which the diurnal light is overcome by diurnal darkness are called obedient. Thus Aries commands and is more powerful than Pisces, and Taurus than Aquarius, and the rest than the rest, which we have described in the following table. Commanding | | 4 | Obedient | X ). p 5 121 my ++ But Ptolemy wanted to indicate to us not only entire dodecatemoria, but also other minute parts of the sky, by means of προςάσοντα, καὶ ἀκόοντα τμήματα. For example, the first part of Aries, and the last of Pisces, the second part of Aries, and the penultimate of Pisces: Likewise the tenth part of Aries, and the twenty-first of Pisces, the twentieth part of Taurus and the eleventh of Aquarius, and so on with the rest, which are equally removed from the vernal or autumnal intersection, mutually command and obey each other. For such an association of such parts we can correctly begin either from Aries and Pisces, or from Virgo and Libra: so that you might understand this more clearly, we have also included a figure of this matter.

[Ptolemy on Equally Powerful Places]
FIRST. 30 20 10 30 20 10 30 4 20 LO COMMANDING. 20 10 HATEFUL 70 20 20 Kri 70 20 10 HATEFUL 2 70 20 10 2030 10 20 30 OBEDIENT S 101 20 30 10 20 30 10 20 30 10 20 30 x Lib.1. cap.. Ptolemy described to us places that are beholding and equally powerful with these words: ἰσοδιωαμεῖμ φασίμ ἀλλήλοις μέρη, τὰ τῷ αὐτῶ καὶ όπος. τορα την τροπικόμ σημείωμτὸ ἴσομἀφεςῶτα, λὰ τὸ καθ' έκατέρο πόντωρ. καὶ ἰσοδυ αὐτῶν τε ο γινομένα, τις τε ἡμορας ταῖς ἡμέραις κὶ τὰς νύκτας ταῖς νυξί, κή, το διας ήματα τῇ οικείωμ ὡρῶμ ἰσόχρονα ἀποτελεῖθη, ναμόντων ταῦτα δε καὶ βλέπαμἄλληλα λέγεται, διά τε τα προφρημένα, καί ἐπειδήπερ εκάτερομ αὐth in to thì cὐτῇ μέρωμα ορίζοντ ἀνατέλλει, καὶ εἰς τὰ αὐτὰ καταδύς, that is: They say that parts are of the same power which are equally distant from one or both of the tropical points, because when the Sun passes through those parts, days become equal to days, and nights to nights, and finally hours become equal to hours. These are also said to behold each other, both for the reasons we have just mentioned, and because both rise and set in the same parts.

[Causes of Equal Power]
DIFFERENCE. from both tropical points, because when the Sun passes through those parts, days become equal to days, and nights to nights, and finally hours become equal to hours. These are also said to behold each other, both for the reasons we have just mentioned, and because both rise and set in the same parts. From these words, three causes are evident, by which parts equally removed from the tropical points, beholding each other, acquire equal power. The first is that they make days and nights equal: the second, that they maintain equal times for the hours: the third, that they always rise and set in one and the same place of the horizon. For example, when the Sun is in the 27th part of Cancer, the same amount of light and darkness is produced as when the Sun is in the fourth part of Gemini, and this in any position of the sphere. Similarly, the temporal hours to be explained below, of the 27th part of Cancer, both diurnal and nocturnal, are equal to the diurnal and nocturnal temporal hours of the fourth part of Gemini. Finally, whether the Sun is in the 27th part of Cancer, or in the 4th part of Gemini, it rises and sets in one and the same point of the horizon, if indeed the said points are constituted in one and the same parallel circle. Now, as for what remains, we propose to examine the beholding and equally powerful signs in the table. (Beholding M I X ++ p καμμια ip) What we warned about a little earlier in the discussion of commanding and obedient places, we repeat here, namely that all these things which are said about the equipollence of entire dodecatemoria, are to be referred not so much to the dodecatemoria themselves, as to parts and scruples of parts, the grammatical ἀπόδαξιμ of which we have presented to the eyes. HATEFUL AND BEHOLDING. HATEFUL AND BEHOLDING.

[Antiscia and Inconjunct Places]
The antiscia of the zodiacal places are arranged in the manner we have described. For ease of use and to resolve all obscurity, we will now describe a table of parts and minutes, from which both commanding and obeying signs, as well as parts of signs and minutes of parts that mutually behold each other, can be easily derived. For example, if Saturn is in the 20th part, 10th minute of Aries, and its obedient and beholding or equivalent place is to be found: first, from the previous descriptions of the figures, it is clear that the sign of Aries commands the sign of Pisces, and the same Aries beholds Virgo. Now, to recognize the corresponding parts to the parts in which Saturn resides, first enter with part 20 into the following table of parts, and opposite part 20 you will find part 11 written. Then also, send the 10 minutes into the table of minutes, and 51 minutes will appear. Therefore, you will declare that in part 20, minute 10 of Aries, it commands part 11, minute 11 of Pisces, and beholds part 11, minute 1 of Virgo. For once the part of one is known, the part of the other will never be unknown, which is most worthy of observation. Julius Firmicus and the author are of the opinion that no part projects antiscia into the 30th part of the dodecatemory, which did not seem to be consistent with the truth. For who does not understand that the middle point of the first degree of Gemini almost beholds the middle point of the thirtieth degree of Cancer? Therefore, with one part moved, I have described the antiscia of the parts here a little differently than Firmicus. TABLE OF ANTISCIA. Parts. | Minutes. ---|--- 1 | 30 | 1 | 60 | 16 | 45 2 | 29 | 2 | 59 | 17 | 44 3 | 28 | 3 | 58 | 18 | 43 4 | 27 | 4 | 57 | 19 | 42 5 | 26 | 5 | 56 | 20 | 41 6 | 25 | 6 | 55 | 21 | 40 7 | 24 | 7 | 54 | 22 | 39 8 | 23 | 8 | 53 | 23 | 38 9 | 22 | 9 | 52 | 24 | 37 10 | 21 | 10 | 51 | 25 | 36 11 | 20 | 11 | 50 | 26 | 35 12 | 19 | 12 | 49 | 27 | 34 13 | 18 | 13 | 48 | 28 | 33 14 | 17 | 14 | 47 | 29 | 32 15 | 16 | 15 | 46 | 30 | 31 We must also observe that two commanding and obeying signs, namely Taurus with Scorpio, and Scorpio with Taurus, are said to command and obey hatefully, because besides this testimony of conjunction, they strike each other with a square radiation. For a similar reason, two combinations of beholding signs, namely Taurus with Leo and Scorpio with Aquarius, are said to behold each other hatefully, which observation contributes greatly to prognostication. From this, it is clear that those born under fixed signs generally harbor hostile enmities, and these are far more intolerable if those signs are commanding and obeying, for these are accustomed to generate dissimilarity of manners, that is, tyranny in the commander and infinite tolerance in the obedient. Here, however, as everywhere, the condition of men must be considered. For if the commander is nobler, he will openly attack the obedient with force and oppression; if of humbler fortune, he will attempt the same, not with violence, but with fraud and deceit, as we have sometimes heard of princes being deceived and seduced by their counselors. However, a more tolerable hostility will exist between those whom beholding signs, which signify similarity of manners, have disjoined. For if those signs are both summer signs, both will be born impatient of injuries and delighting in command; if winter signs, both will be dissimulators. These things being so, it is clear that beholding places by themselves are joined neither by a bond of concord nor discord, but only determine a similarity of manners, such as equal tolerance or impatience. For if intuition were a bond of concord, with the hatred of square radiation repelled or certainly mitigated, it would create a certain mediocrity of consent. Therefore, the intuition of signs creates a similarity of manners between two; but discord or concord, a suitable or hostile figuration of places. Nor should it be overlooked that beholding and commanding signs with obeying signs are more powerful, and diffuse their virtue much more widely near both solstices, where the Sun's declination varies very gradually, than around the equinoxes, where the declination suddenly and rapidly increases or decreases. For, as Pliny says, the position of the zodiac near its middle is more oblique, but near the solstices it is more direct. Therefore, the 10th part of Cancer, although precisely conjoined with the 21st part of Gemini, nevertheless almost agrees with the tenth part of the same sign of Gemini, and much more with the remaining intermediate parts. For it can be estimated from the figures of the antiscia delineated by us a little earlier that the parallel circles of such points differ by almost only one degree. On the contrary, near the equinoxes, where the parallels of individual parts are widely disjoined, they can do little unless parts correspond to parts. There is also a manifest use of inconjunct places in judgments; since these are plainly left by the author, we will therefore also adduce their definitions and notes from Ptolemy, lest any precept necessary for a full knowledge of the art be lacking in these instructions. The words of Ptolemy, by which he explained inconjunct and alien places to us, are these: "Unconnected and alienated sections are called those which have no simple relation to each other of the enumerated associations. These are those which neither command nor obey, nor behold each other, nor are of equal power, nor describe any of the four figures we have enumerated above, that is, neither diameter, nor trine, nor square, nor sextile, but those which are numbered second or sixth. For two continuous signs are averted from each other, and by mutual contact form one angle rather than any figure. But those which are numbered sixth divide the whole circle into unequal parts, while other figures divide it into equal parts." These are Ptolemy's words, which, to understand correctly, you must have at hand the nine ways we have hitherto explained chapter by chapter, by which the parts of the zodiac are connected to each other. For first, those places cohere by command, that is, when they exist in two lines parallel to the equinox. Secondly, by equal power, that is, when one and the same line parallel to the equinox terminates them. Thirdly, when they are disjoined by diameter. Fourthly, if they embrace each other by trine. Fifthly, if they form a square figure. Sixthly, finally, if they are associated by sextile: of which ways, the three latter, since they double the number, as shown above in the chapter on aspects, make nine bonds by which each place of the zodiac is coupled with other places, of which twelve are found in the whole zodiac. When this is so, two places will remain unconnected, that is, excluded from all coupling. Aries, for example, since it commands Pisces, and beholds Libra, and finally is coupled by diametrical, square, and trine radiation, and sextile to Gemini and Aquarius, it leaves at least two other signs unconnected, namely Taurus and Virgo, to which it coheres by no bond at all. Similarly, the same must be judged for all other movable and common signs. For fixed signs, although they can be coupled with at least eight other signs, are plainly deserted by the others. This happens because two signs, connecting themselves more firmly by a double bond, are deprived of two couplings. For example, Taurus with Scorpio, and Aquarius with Leo, cohere by a double bond, namely intuition and square. Similarly, Taurus with Leo, and Scorpio with Aquarius, are connected by imperial power besides square radiation. For this reason, we said a little earlier that the former are called mutually beholding with great hatred, and the latter commanding and obeying not without indignation. Therefore, those signs which are joined to other signs by no plain bond, such as the nine we have already explained, Ptolemy calls unconnected and alien, such as those which are numbered second or sixth. For the second are tortuously disjoined to different parts, and forming at least one angle, they enclose no figure, nor are they in a straight line as in a diameter.

[Luminaries and Friendship]
15. If they generate maximum hatred due to a square radiation. If by chance we are deprived of this testimony of familiarity, we should see whether the Sun and Moon have exchanged their places, that is, whether the place of the Sun in Paul's nativity is the place of the Moon in Peter's nativity, and conversely, whether the place of the Sun in Peter's nativity is the place of the Moon in Paul's. This uniquely promotes benevolence. For example, if when Paul was born, the Sun passed through Sagittarius and the Moon through Scorpio, and when Peter was born, the Sun passed through Scorpio and the Moon through Sagittarius, we would judge that there would be a very close familiarity between Paul and Peter due to the exchanged signs of the luminaries, and indeed, a wonderfully stable one due to the obedience of the luminary signs, which, as this aphorism states, increase benevolence and generate a certain conformity of manners. For both the sign of Pisces and Scorpio are obedient. But if such an aspect of the Sun's places, or the Moon's places, or an exchange of luminaries, were to occur from Libra and Scorpio, it would similarly be signified by a trine radiation, but not with such equal benevolence. For the love of him whose significators occupy Cancer, an imperious sign, is joined with a certain command and pride; but the significators of the other, Scorpio, are found in the obedient sign of Scorpio with subjection and servitude. In the same way, if the signs of the horoscopes in both nativities are either the same, or trine, or sextile, or finally if they have exchanged places, they will signify friendship. But since each native has a single ascending sign, how can an exchange of horoscopes occur? I answer that in such a comparison, the Part of Fortune must be assumed. For just as the ascendant is the Sun's, so the lunar lot is the horoscope. But just as friendship is judged from the συμφονία (harmony) of the said places, so conversely, hatred is judged from the ἀσυμφονία (disharmony) of the same places. For if square or opposite, or ἀσύνδετα (unconnected) or unconjoined signs are possessed without any exchange of luminaries, they will announce hostilities, hatreds, and enmities. They also refer the seventy-eighth statement to the use of antiscia: πολλάκις ἐνοργεῖ ὁ ἀς προ να τόπωυκ ἔχε εἰ οργφαμ, καρδθ ἀπροσδόκητη προσφορωμ. τους Hννωμοίῳ. That is, a star often exercises powers where it has no powers, bringing unexpected gain to the native. For example, if the 7th degree of Scorpio culminates, and Jupiter is in the 24th degree of Taurus. Here Jupiter, although it does not aspect Scorpio, nevertheless helps the native to attain magistracies through the hidden protection of the antiscium. For the 7th degree of Scorpio and the 24th degree of Taurus are of the same potency. But if Taurus hostilely strikes this antiscium of Jupiter, it will disturb the administration of the magistracy. Conversely, Venus will help Jupiter, and will bring about a successful administration, and will bring support to that antiscium from benevolent places. Therefore, if ever the stars do not see each other, it must be considered whether they are joined to each other by associated radiation through the antiscium. For when the antiscium has emitted in such a way that they are joined by trine, square, or sextile radiation through it, the stars themselves thus determine, as if they were constituted in a simple arrangement. If you diligently attend to all these things, you will be greatly helped in explaining the fates of men.

[Accidental Being of the Circle]
CONCERNING THE ACCIDENTAL BEING OF THE CIRCLE. But since, with God's help, we have already set forth the essential being of the circle of Signs, let us now set forth the accidental. For the circle is figured at every hour with such a figure, which is divided into four parts, which are divided by the circle of the hemisphere and the circle of the meridian, that is, the circle of the midheaven, which makes midday. And each of these parts is divided into three unequal parts, according to the ascensions of the ascending sign. And in this way the circle is divided into twelve parts, which are called houses: they are also called cusps and towers, whose work is expounded in the book of Ezibi, that is, in the book of the course of the stars. The beginning of the division is also the horoscope: that is, the ascendant, whose beginning is above the circle of the eastern hemisphere, then the second house follows and the third, and the other houses up to the twelfth.

[General Figure of the Celestial Magistracy]
From the division of the zodiac, which is perpetual and unvarying, we now pass to its accidental division. Hitherto, we have distinguished the zodiac, or rather the entire machinery of the world, into four quadrants perpetually congruent with the times of the year, into twelve regions of the signs, into ascending and descending halves, hot and cold, and many such stable parts, divided by circles or rather by hemicycles drawn through the pole of the zodiac. And finally, we have shown the familiarity and agreement of the zodiac's quadrants and signs with other things. Now, however, we must similarly distinguish the same machinery of the world into halves, quadrants, and twelve regions, but differently, that is, into inconstant parts, and continually variable due to the first motion, by the office of the meridional circle and the horizon and the hemicycles ending in the intersections of these circles, and dividing not the zodiac, but rather the equinoctial equally. And similarly, we must explain the familiarities or agreements of the quadrants and those twelve unstable stations of the heavens with the things subject to them. And this distinction agrees with Ptolemy's doctrine. For he also, having explained the natural texture of the times of the year, adds the nature of the accidental parts of the heavens and times according to the same example and manner: "Similarly," he says, "the four places and angles of the horizon, one having more of the dry towards the east," etc. These things being so, for the sake of learning and aiding memory, this part will be conveniently divided into two members, the first of which is where the author explains the accidental division of the zodiac, which continually varies with the diurnal revolution of the heavens; the second, where he enumerates the familiarities or significations of the quadrants and the twelve places of the heavens, which accompany this accidental, as he calls it, and mutable division of the zodiac. But the author very briefly touches upon the first member, which ought to contain the method of distributing the heavens, and refers the whole matter of constructing the celestial domiciles to the canons of the tables. Therefore, I think I shall do a worthwhile deed if I describe more fully in this place all the variety of this distribution for young students, and show the complete method of forming themes or pictures of the houses, and the way of extracting the places of the planets from the tables of ephemerides and motions. But before all else, certain circles omitted by the author of the Sphere must be described, the knowledge of which is not only necessary for the distinction of the celestial domiciles, but also for understanding the method of directing, as they call it. Vertical circles are those which, drawn through the vertex of the place and through each part of the horizon, divide it into 360 parts, and are called by some circles of rectitude, because they show in what region of the world any star rises or sets, and how far it is at any time from the east or west, from the south or north. Most people call them azimuth circles by an exotic name. It must be observed here that the meridian also belongs to the number of vertical circles, whose use is greatest in astrology above all others; but next to it in dignity among the vertical circles is that which, intersecting the meridian at right angles and drawn through the points of rising and setting, divides the horizon into four equal parts, whence, because of its manifold use, it is almost uniquely called the vertical circle by its proper name. Therefore, whenever the name of the vertical circle occurs absolutely, understand the vertical circle which is drawn through the rising and setting and through the vertex of the place. But understand the circles of altitude by this description: The vertex of any place is distant from its horizon by 90 degrees. If, therefore, planes equally distant from the horizon are understood to be drawn through the divisions of each part, circles of altitude will be formed, the first and greatest of all being the horizon itself. Each of the others, however, is smaller the closer it is to the vertex. Thus, all drawn together, intersecting the quadrants of the meridian and the other vertical circles at 90 degrees, and being intersected by them in turn at 360 degrees, they weave a kind of hemispherical net. Most people call these circles almicantarath by a foreign name. The office of these circles is to show the true distance and altitude of the Sun and other stars from the rising or setting in the vertical circles. For the altitude of a star or of any point noted in the sky is the arc of the vertical circle drawn through the center of the star, falling between the horizon and the star itself. A star obtains its meridian altitude when it reaches the meridian circle; but when it is absent from the meridian, it is said to have an eastern antemeridian altitude; if it has passed it, a western postmeridian altitude. The circle of position is that which is drawn through the center of a given star and through the intersections of the meridian and the horizon. This is sometimes called the horizon or boundary of the star, and has no small use in the progressions of Aphetic places. These things being known beforehand, let us proceed to the description of the horoscope. The horoscope is properly said to be that which observes the reason of the hours. But here we call the horoscope the natal star, or rather that part of the Zodiac which rises by the revolution of the heavens at the moment when someone is born, or when any other thing begins. It is sometimes taken, as here, for the picture of the heavens, which the Greeks call schema, that is, it is taken for the whole heaven figured in a flat form and distributed into twelve parts or places, which have received various appellations from astrologers. For they call them domiciles, habitations, towers, parts, hospices, mansions, and commonly twelve houses in the figure of the revolution of the heavens. Although not one but many and diverse methods are read among astrologers by which the entire heaven is variously divided into 12 parts, nevertheless all agree in this, that they imagine six great circles intersecting each other in two opposite places, whose common diameter extends from south to north, distinguishing the entire heaven and the whole machinery of the world into 12 parts, so that whatever is in the world is entirely comprehended in one of these 12 parts, which we call houses. But the extremities of the diameter, in which the said six circles intersect each other, I find to be constituted differently by different authors. For the author, as it appears, and those who preceded Campanus in teaching about dividing celestial domiciles, thought that these two points were the vertices of the world, in which the heaven, revolved daily with ineffable speed in the space of 24 hours, is the most potent cause of the said domiciles. For greater clarity, imagine two great circles, one of which is the meridian, and the other drawn through the point of the ecliptic ascending above the horizon and its opposite, so that by their mutual intersection at the poles of the world, they divide the heaven into four portions. Thereafter, each of the portions of the equinoctial, intercepted by the said two great circles, must be equally divided into three parts, and through the points of section and the poles of the world, four circles must be drawn, which, with the previous two, constitute the twelve domiciles of the heaven according to the author. In this method of equalizing, the horizon circle is counted among the said six circles only in a right sphere, never in an oblique sphere: which Abraham Avenezra also noted. Moreover, as the author warns, this also results in the same six circles always dividing the ecliptic into twelve unequal parts, and only making opposite domiciles equal; indeed, in this way the ecliptic is separated into four equal quadrants only at a certain hour of the day, namely when the beginnings of Aries and Libra lie on the horizon. Others again judged these points of section, which are common to the six circles, to be the intersections of the meridian and the horizon. But not even here do all agree among themselves. For Campanus and Gazalus distinguish the domiciles.

[House Division Methods]
In this manner, the quadrants of the vertical circle passing through the ascendant and descendant, intercepted between the horizon and the meridian, are divided into three equal portions. Then, through the points of the sections and through the common sections of the meridian and horizon, four circles of positions are imagined to be drawn, which, with the ascendant and meridian, divide the entire sky into twelve equal spaces, and this is according to the ratio of the parts of the vertical circle, and not according to the parts of the zodiac or the equator. Horontius, otherwise a distinguished artisan, defends this method of equalizing houses and thinks it should be retained. On the contrary, Regiomontanus, in Problem 14 of his tables, rejects it as alien to the mind of philosophers and constructs another fabric of celestial domiciles differing from the two preceding methods. First, he divides not the vertical circle, but the equinoctial itself into four equal parts by the meridian and the oblique ascendant, each of which quadrants he again cuts into three equal parts, and through the points of the sections he draws four circles of positions, which, meeting at the sections of the horizon and meridian, divide the entire sky into twelve houses of the sky. This method of Regiomontanus is, as it were, intermediate between the first and second. For in that he divides the equinoctial and not the vertical circle into twelve equal parts, he agrees with the first method and contradicts Campanus, but inasmuch as six circles meet and intersect not in the poles of the world, but in the common sections of the ascendant and meridian, to that extent he dissents from the first method and agrees with Campanus's reasoning. Finally, here the spaces of the sky are unequal in every oblique horizon, as in the first, but each house retains its invariable magnitude, as in the second. Therefore, he not unreasonably calls this method of equalization rational, because it rationally avoids all the inconveniences that could be objected to the extremes. Although this method of the most learned Regiomontanus is more erudite than all the others and simply more consistent with the truth, and finally approaches most closely to Ptolemy's opinion, there were nevertheless those who did not approve of it much, such as Johannes Schonerus and the other distinguished artisans of our age, who prefer to this and all other methods another, and in our order, fourth fabric of equal domiciles, as they call them, which is to be imagined in this way. First, the zodiac is separated by the ascendant and a great circle passing through both poles of the zodiac and the vertex of the place into four quadrants. Afterwards, each quadrant of the ecliptic is cut into three equal parts: which done, if you understand five circles to be drawn through the points of such sections and the poles of the zodiac, those very circles, with the one that passed through the vertex, will divide the entire zodiac and the whole world into twelve equal parts or houses, to which all astrologers are said by many to have accommodated their judgments. That this is true cannot be denied, if it is understood of Firmicus, Albohali, Albumasar, Albubater, Bonatus, and similar authors. But that the supreme Ptolemy, the prince of all astrologers, nay, among so many writers on celestial matters, the only astrologer, in his quadripartite construction approved this equal equalization of houses, it is certain that this is done with insufficiently firm conjectures, the principal of which I will recite here. And first, to begin with those things that are thought to be most firm, the figure of equal sides, which they think can happen nowhere else than in the equalization of houses, which is done by equal degrees, assigning 30 degrees of the zodiac to each house, scarcely supports their opinion. But this is not sagaciously enough, nor consistent with Ptolemy's opinion. For the very words of Ptolemy, which are extant in the third apotelesmatic, chapter on those who are not nourished, openly speak that the figure is to be understood otherwise. He says, "If one luminary is in an angle, and one of the malefics either conjoins or opposes it, and this partially and according to an isosceles figure, no benefic being configured, and the ruler of the luminaries being detained in the places of the malefics: what is born cannot be nourished, and will soon die." In these words, by an isosceles figure, he understands an exact conjunction of bodies or rays, both according to longitude and latitude, so that in conjunction the latitude is the same, but in opposition of the Sun, the malefic is below the Ecliptic, but in opposition of the Moon, the malefic has an equal latitude, but opposite. For example, let Saturn be in the 12th part, with a northern latitude of 3 parts, and the Moon opposite Saturn in the 12th part, with a southern latitude of 3 parts. It is now manifest that Saturn and the Moon with their places in the ecliptic make two isosceles and equal triangles, in which one side of the isosceles is the fourth part of the ecliptic, the other the fourth part of the great circle passing through the centers of the Moon and the malefic and the poles of the zodiac. Similarly, when the latitude is equal on the same side, we imagine an isosceles figure in the quadrants of the ecliptic and the circle of latitude because the arcs of the said circles drawn from their common intersection, and cut off by the circle passing through the poles of the zodiac and the point of conjunction, are equal to each other: which the annexed diagram clearly shows. Moreover, Schonerus wrote that an isosceles figure is formed if the Sun is in the ascendant, the Moon in the fourth house, the infortune in the seventh, striking the Sun by diameter, and the Moon by square. But Ptolemy did not speak of an equilateral triangle, that is, of a figure of three equal sides, such as is depicted in this configuration, but of an isosceles figure, of which only two sides are equal, such as we showed a little earlier. Moreover, Ptolemy in this place made no mention of the square configuration, which is added here by Schonerus. Finally, the following words in the same place clearly state that Ptolemy understood by an isosceles figure only an exact conjunction of opposite bodies or rays: "But if this position does not form a triangle of two equal sides, that is, if the malefics do not harm the luminaries by the same longitude and latitude, but only apply their rays to the places of the luminaries from nearby, etc." From these it can be clearly seen that the equal distribution of houses in the zodiac is by no means confirmed by an isosceles figure. It remains to be seen.

[Ptolemy on Aphetic Places]
We will present the opinion of the other place, from which the same is defended by the authority of Ptolemy. This passage is found in Book 3, Chapter on Aphetic Places, whose words are these: "First, indeed, it must be considered that there are Aphetic or prorogating places, in which it is absolutely necessary for him to be found who wishes to obtain the jurisdiction of governing life, as around the horoscope from five parts previously emerging above the horizon up to the 25 remaining succeeding. And he who touches these thirty parts with right hexagonal rays, which is called the place of the good daemon, and is the eleventh in order. And he who touches with tetragonal rays, namely the zenith above the earth, and he who touches with trigonal rays, which is called God, and he who touches with opposite rays, which is cast into the setting. So far Ptolemy, from whose words it is rightly gathered that the five degrees preceding the cusp and the 25 immediately following hold the virtue of such a house: but what is added about the zodiac, namely, that each house contains qualitatively 30 parts of the zodiac, does not proceed. For Ptolemy here makes no mention of the zodiac: nor does he speak of its parts, but of the equinoctial parts, so that each house is understood to be bounded by 30 equinoctial parts. And this is the reason why he immediately adds that the eleventh house always sees the horoscope with a sextile aspect, the ninth with a trine, the midheaven with a square, which would be absurd if this text of Ptolemy is understood of an equal distribution of domiciles in the ecliptic. For in many places, with the sign Gemini ascending, the midheaven occupies, and thus it does not look at the horoscope from a square, but from a trine aspect of the ecliptic. On the contrary, with the ascendant falling into the ninth house, it will not see the horoscope from a trine, but from a square. Therefore, Cardanus rightly teaches concerning Ptolemy's opinion that two kinds of aspects are to be understood, one in the zodiac, which must be taken exactly in the ecliptic from a similar part and minute, as said above. The other, which Ptolemy understands here, is in the equinoctial, in which, as in the zodiac, the configurations of the twelve signs are to be imagined. Many obscure passages of his agree with this opinion, as when he says that the trine of malefics from signs of short ascensions also destroys when afflicted, that is, when the two circles of position, impacted into the ecliptic through the extremities of the triangular figure, enclose such an interval from the equinoctial that it represents the form of a square aspect in the same equinoctial: then such a triangular aspect of malefics, encountering the giver of life, destroys the native. Similarly also these words, which precede the former passage: "sometimes also the hexagon, afflicted by the long-lived parts of the dodecatemoria, destroys," are to be understood of a double radiation and of the transformation of the hexagonal aspect in the ecliptic into a square aspect in the equinoctial, otherwise neither the trine of short ascensions nor the hexagon of long ascensions would kill. All these things, therefore, which are adduced from Ptolemy, sufficiently show that they are alien to the equal distribution of domiciles which is established in the zodiac, and openly testify that Monteregius approaches most closely to Ptolemy's opinion in the equation of celestial domiciles, so far is it from being able to be accommodated to understanding his opinion. It also seemed wonderful to me how Ptolemy is understood to denote the circle drawn through the vertex and poles of the zodiac by these words, which are found in Book 4, Chapter on Children: "If the reason for marriage also follows the reason for children, it is necessary to observe those things that are present at the vertex," etc., where by "the place at the vertex" is shown the midheaven, that is, the zenith or the tenth house, and rather the meridian than the circle drawn through the poles of the zodiac is indicated. We have not made mention here of those things which are adduced from the Centiloquium, since it is certain that this writing is falsely attributed to Ptolemy, and in most places it entirely contradicts his doctrine, which he left to us expounded with his own genius in the Quadripartitum. But now I will proceed from the section of the sky to the canons for constructing domiciles, after having first explained the order and names of the cusps for the sake of the less learned. The first house is that whose cusp or beginning first emerges, and according to the method of Monteregius it is then drawn out through thirty equinoctial parts, which Firmicus and the rest of the crowd count in the zodiac. The Greeks call it "anatole," that is, the rising part, because it ascends from the lower to the upper hemisphere: also calling it the horoscope. The circle of position below the earth, distant from the horizon by 30 parts, defines the first house and begins the second. Therefore, know that the house which succeeds the first below the horizon is the second house. This is followed by the third, which is bounded at the angle of the notes, and so on, going against the motion of the primum mobile, the remaining houses are numbered up to the twelfth house, because the order of the signs is such, and the motion of the planets proceeds in this way. Four of these twelve houses are called "katra," that is, the cardines of the sky, namely "anatole," the eastern cardo, "dysis," the setting or western cardo: "mesouranema," the midheaven or tenth house: "hypogeion," the imum medium coeli or fourth house. Ptolemy, however, specifically calls the summits of the first lines initiating the domiciles, centers: but the spaces completing these four principal stations of the sky, he usually calls angles. The four that follow the cardines, namely the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh, are called "epanaphora," that is, succeeding: The remaining four, namely the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth, are called "apoklinontes," that is, cadent. All these are shown to the eyes in the general figure of the sky, whose "katagraphe" I add for the sake of the less learned: Having taken the first square of just magnitude, if a second square is inscribed, whose angles touch the midpoints of the four sides of the first square, four triangular figures will be formed, each of which is cut in half by straight lines extended from the angles of the first square to the midpoints of the sides of the second. Finally, a third square is described in the second no differently than the second was inscribed in the first, and around the third square will appear twelve triangular forms, which we call celestial domiciles. Similar

[Calculating Celestial Figures: Monteregius' Method]
A similar and equally valid scheme is when two squares, one inscribed within the other, are divided by two diagonals proceeding from opposite angles of the outer square, as follows. These are the FIRST. Most people in our time use these methods for projecting the heavens onto a plane. There are also many other less common forms of depicting the heavens, whose delineation we have omitted for that reason. Having explained these things, we will proceed to the astrology of constructing celestial charts for any moment in time and for any latitude of a region. And first, we will bring back to calculation the method of Monteregius, since he alone is the one who agrees with Ptolemy's opinion and truth, and therefore must be known above all by students. On the construction of the celestial figure according to the rational method of John Monteregius from the tables of directions: - The action of celestial light is admirable, as it not only affects, governs, and nourishes bodies already born and perfected in the sublunar world, but also confers upon all things that arise under a certain celestial disposition, from the very beginning, that power which governs and preserves them until the end of their duration, so that from the beginning of generated things, the duration of their existence is cast, and such will be the future event as was the position of the heavens at their origin: and that from the beginning of motion, the remaining series of future motions until the end can be explained by those skilled in nature. Since the heavens, due to their ineffable speed, significantly change their position at every moment in time, it is easy to judge why astrologers, in explaining future events according to the natural order of things arising from the position of the heavens, diligently seek out the moments in time when these things began. For unless the time of the origin of things is accurately told to us, we will never be able to arrive at the true position of the heavens, nor at the cause that infuses a preservative power into things produced at that time. Therefore, in constructing true celestial charts, the first concern is that we do not deviate from the true time, that is, not only from the year, month, day, and hour, but also from the minute and second of time when the thing itself began. However, since the diversity of civil and mathematical time can entangle and mislead the incautious and less educated minds here, we will first prescribe how to reduce political or common time to Astronomical time, so that it agrees with the calculation of the tables. Mathematicians, for reasons to be explained elsewhere, take the beginning of the day from the meridian circle, that is, from that point where the Sun holds the meridian circle either above or below the earth, and from there they count 24 continuous hours until the Sun repeats the same place. In Ephemerides, motions are also calculated in this way, so that the positions of the stars assigned for each day are always to be understood as referring to completed Mathematical days. For example, in the year 1527, on May 21, at 3 hours and 47 minutes, someone was born in Valladolid, under latitude 41 degrees, and longitude 8 degrees, 20 minutes. The opposition of the luminaries immediately preceding the birth was on May 15, according to which the motion of the Sun in Stöffler's Ephemeris is assigned as 3 degrees, 6 minutes, 11 seconds. This motion is to be understood as referring to the completed Mathematical day, that is, that at that point of the meridian of that day, which is also civilly called the fifteenth of May, the center of the Sun is found in the said minute of the sign of Gemini. For Stöffler, in his Ephemerides, calculated the positions of the stars not for midnight, but for midday or the middle of the diurnal light. Furthermore, the time of the opposition of the luminaries, which falls on the same day, is noted as 11 hours, 11 minutes, which again is to be understood as referring to completed time, that is, that this Mathematical day is entirely completed, and moreover, 11 hours and 11 minutes have passed. If the same opposition had been around the 23rd hour, it should be understood that it would have been one hour before midday of the next day, which civilly refers to May 16. For civilly or in common life, days are often begun from the meridian circle, but not from midday, as in our ephemerides, but they begin at midnight and extend to the middle of the following night. Such are also the calculations of motions in the Prutenic Tables, in which the Epochs of Christ are set for midnight of the day preceding the Kalends of January. Therefore, those who, following the example of the Romans, begin the day from midnight, and use not a full clock, but twelve hours repeated twice, you will adapt their hours to Astronomical time begun from midday, if you add twelve post-meridian hours to the ante-meridian hours or those elapsed after midnight, and diminish the number of civil days by one. As if someone were born in the year of salvation 1527, on May 21, at 9 hours, 47 minutes before midday, then for such civil time to be adapted to the time of the ephemerides, 12 hours must be added to the 9 hours and 47 minutes, so that 21 hours, 47 minutes result, which time of hours and minutes follows the completed twentieth day of May. The same is true if in such a case you subtract twelve hours from the common or political time. As if from May 21, 9 hours, 47 minutes, you subtract 12 hours, there will remain, as before, May 20, 21 hours, 47 minutes. However, if hours counted from midday to midnight are offered, they agree with Astronomical hours and do not admit any further commutation. As happened in the assumed nativity, which, as we said so long ago, was in the year 1527, on May 21, at 3 hours, 47 minutes after midday. That time does not need our reduction, for May 21 is offered as completed at midday, and moreover, hours along with 47 minutes. Such a simple commutation of time is not only sufficient for constructing the figure of the heavens, but also useful for extracting the motions of the planets both from the usual ephemerides and from most tables of celestial motions, which they call resolved. But if it is desired to collect the motions of the stars from the Prutenic Tables and from the Epochs of Christ, which, as I said, are set for midnight: then, conversely, we must convert Astronomical hours, begun from midday, into hours calculated from midnight, by subtracting twelve hours from the time transformed to the beginning of midday in the manner I have already explained, so that the astronomical hours counted from the middle of the night remain. If, however, subtraction cannot be made from the hours, then an entire natural day, that is, 24 hours, as is customary in physical calculation, must be accommodated, and the number of days diminished by one. And conversely, if time calculated from midnight is offered, and it is to be translated to the beginning of midday, then 12 hours must be added to the proposed time, and if from such a composition more than 24 hours arise, twenty-four hours must be discarded, and the number of days increased by one. If by chance you wish to convert hours counted from sunset, which the Athenians once used, into Astronomical hours calculated from midday, then combine your hours calculated from sunset with the semi-diurnal time, which must be found by the doctrine of ascensions, and the Mathematical time begun from midday will be formed. And if from such an addition more than 24 hours exist, remember again that 24 hours must be discarded from the aggregate, and the number of days increased by one. Conversely, if time calculated from midday is to be converted into time flowing from sunset, subtract the arc of semi-diurnal time from the astronomical hours, and whenever subtraction cannot be made, assume 24 hours, and diminish the number of days by one, and the time counted from sunset will remain. Finally, you will convert the time counted from sunrise into our said Astronomical time, if you add to it the semi-diurnal arc along with a full 12 hours, again discarding 24 hours if necessary, and increasing the number of days by one. But conversely, if those astronomical hours are to be translated into hours counted from sunrise, you will subtract the semi-nocturnal arc of time along with a full 12 hours.

[Calculating Astronomical Time]
From these, subtract 12 hours, adjusting again, if the matter so demands, by 24 hours, and with the number of days diminished by one, the time calculated from sunset will remain. As for the reason for such time commutations, it is readily apparent to those who understand that those who begin their movements from noon encompass more time backward than those who begin from sunset, or from midnight, or finally from sunrise. However, the common or civil times, when they have been translated into astronomical time adjusted to noon according to these precepts, will no longer require any further correction, as far as constructing the figure of the heavens is concerned. For the figure of the heavens is conformed to the equated time that agrees with civil time. But if astronomical time is taken from tables of movements or ephemerides, which usually happens when we wish to know the ascendant of an eclipse, or of another luminary or the conjunction of other stars: then for the true constitution of the chart, the natural days' prothaphairesis, or as it is called, the equation, must be added to it or subtracted from it. Similarly, for the meridians, the time found in the table of regions must be added to it or subtracted from it, as indicated by the A or M assigned there. And so far concerning the determination of true time, which must first be observed in the construction of the celestial figure. The second precept is that for this very astronomical time, we derive the true place of the Sun from the tables of movements or ephemerides: where also the difference of the meridians must be considered, if your location and the locations of the Ephemerides differ by a notable longitude. This difference, as will be explained more clearly below, must be added to the time for which you have decided to extract the Sun's place: if your location is more westerly than the location of the tables or Ephemerides, or subtracted from it if it is more easterly. As in our example, since the location of Valladolid is longitude 8 degrees 20 minutes, it is 24 degrees 40 minutes, that is, 1 hour 38 minutes, more westerly than the location of Ulm, for which Stoffler's Ephemerides are adapted, whose longitude is 33 degrees 0 minutes. Therefore, this difference must be added to 3 hours 47 minutes, so that 5 hours 25 minutes result. If one wishes to pursue the matter more scrupulously, 9 minutes must still be added due to the equation of days, so that 5 hours 35 minutes result, which is the time adapted in all ways for the Sun's place, indeed, for the places of all the stars to be derived from the Ephemerides. Furthermore, when we have found the true place of the Sun, we will immediately extract the corresponding arc of the equinoctial from the tables of right ascensions, and this will suffice if the Sun is precisely on the meridian, that is, if no hours or minutes of time are attached after the completion of the days at noon. But if the Sun has passed some time from noon, then the arc of the equinoctial, which the hours and minutes of the afternoon hours converted into degrees and minutes of the equinoctial make up, must be added to the right ascension of the Sun's place, so that the number of degrees and minutes resulting from such an addition shows the right ascension of the Midheaven or the cusp of the tenth house. Moreover, the hours and minutes of hours multiplied by 15 degrees pass into equinoctial times. For in every equal hour, 15 degrees of the equinoctial rise everywhere. This, however, is to be understood as physical multiplication. But if you prefer to follow the common method of calculation, multiply the hours by 15 degrees, and divide the first minutes of the hours by 4, so that the degrees of the equinoctial corresponding to such time result: since, as has been said, 15 times correspond to one hour of time from the equinoctial, and for this reason, one degree of the equinoctial corresponds to four first minutes of time. As in our example, since we must transform 3 hours and 47 minutes into degrees of the equinoctial, we will multiply 3 hours by 15, and 45 parts will result. We will divide 47 minutes by 4, and 11 parts 45 minutes will result, which, combined with 45 parts, produce 56 parts 45 minutes, which is the arc of the equinoctial corresponding to 3 hours and 47 minutes of time. Thirdly, you will collect the oblique ascension of the remaining five eastern houses, which succeed the tenth house up to the fourth, if you add 30 parts to the ascension of the Midheaven five times in order. For example, if you add 30 parts to the ascension of the MC, the sum will be the oblique ascension of the eleventh house. If you again add 30 parts to this, you will collect the oblique ascension of the twelfth house, and so on, by continuous addition of 30 parts, the oblique ascensions of the succeeding cusps are to be derived. Fourthly, the places of the Ecliptic, which correspond to these ascensions, are to be derived from the tables of ascensions, of which peculiar ones serve almost every place, by the ninth problem of Monteregius. But the cusp of the tenth house is always taken from the tables of right ascensions, for the meridional circle acts as the right horizon. The table constructed for the latitude of the proposed place serves the cardine of the rising heaven. Finally, the rational table of houses, placed near the end of Monteregius' tables, indicates the tables serving to derive the cusps of the remaining houses. In its area, two distinct numbers are found, the former showing the elevation of the pole above the circle of position of the eleventh and third houses, the latter showing the same above the circle of position of the twelfth and second houses. Therefore, seek the number of the elevation of the pole, or what is the same, the number of the latitude of the given place in the left side of the rational table, and opposite it in the area you will find numbers that indicate from which tables and for what latitude they were constructed, the principles of the remaining houses are to be derived. For example, the latitude of the place of birth, which we use in the exemplary exposition, is 41 parts. Therefore, the table of oblique ascensions constructed for the latitude of 23 parts and 29 minutes will serve the eleventh and third cusps. The twelfth and second will be adapted to another table made for the latitude of 36 parts 58 minutes. But since the tables of oblique ascensions are constructed only for whole degrees, therefore for 23 parts and 29 minutes, we will simply assume 23 or 24 parts, and for 36 parts 58 minutes, simply 37 whole parts, due to the proximity of the numbers, for ease of use without manifest error. If we wish to execute everything diligently and elaborate it to the letter, by consulting the end of the ninth problem of Monteregius' tables, we will know what the calculator needs to do, adjusting his calculation to the altitude of the pole not precisely in degrees, but in minutes of degrees. But this diligence is necessary only for accurately constituting the horoscoping part, since the tenth house is not accustomed to having any number of the exalted vertex attached, and for the remaining cusps placed outside the cardines, a calculation made approximately abundantly suffices. However, once the beginnings of the six eastern houses are known, the principles of the remaining six western houses will no longer be hidden, since each eastern house looks diametrically opposite to its counterpart in the western part. Therefore, if we describe similar parts and minutes in the opposite houses of the opposite signs, we will complete the entire celestial chart. But all these things, so that they may become clearer by example, for the time of the assumed birth, namely, for the 21st day of May, at the third hour after noon.

[Aspects and Their Nature]
FIRST. 53. as you see in the diagram, with six lines emanating from one center, which, when drawn in a circle, divide it into six equal parts. This aspect is considered moderately good, because the signs contemplating each other at this interval agree in sex and nature. 2. This is closely followed by the square, that is, the square aspect. And it looks at the breast: so called because it comprehends the fourth part of the Zodiac, that is, three signs or P.90., which you see described in the figure, etc., by the straight line AD, and marked with a tetragon, which, inscribed in a circle, receives three signs on each side. This aspect is judged moderately bad, because the two signs at such an interval disagree in sex and nature. 3. The square is followed by the trine, that is, the trine aspect, which contains the third part of the Zodiac, that is, P.120.: and it is described in the diagram by the straight line AE, and marked by an equilateral triangle A, which, when transferred to the inner circle, receives 4 signs on each side. This aspect is also judged good, partly because of its efficacy, partly because the three signs distant by such an interval agree in sex and nature. 4. The trine is followed by the diameter, that is, the diametral or opposite aspect, which contains half of the circle, that is, six signs, P. 180.: and it is described in the diagram by the straight line AF, and marked by two opposite orbs. This aspect is considered egregiously bad, not because of the conflict of natures in the signs, but rather by reason of opposition: for those things which are opposite and most distant, are most inimical to each other, and in every genus are contrary to each other. There are therefore two causes of disagreement in aspects: one, and most principal, is the conflict of signs in nature and sex: the other, and principal, is the greatest distance. Thus in the square ray, since the distance is moderate, and the contrariety is only in the nature and sex of the signs, the disagreement is less. And when the radiations do not differ greatly, they do not disagree, but agree moderately because of the similarity of natures and sex in the dodecatemoria: but opposite signs, since they differ most by 15. of the third element of Euclid, therefore, even if they agree in nature and sex, they nevertheless disagree most because of the greatest distance: just as both are masculine and diurnal, and both are feminine and nocturnal, and yet they are opposite and disagreeing, G3 - Digitized by Google 54 DIFFERENCE disagreeing, the cause of which disagreement is their greatest distance, and not diversity or contrariety in sex and nature, which is absolutely true: for it is manifest that opposite signs, which agree in sex and nature, ought to be believed to fight most and more than squares. What some have handed down, that opposite signs disagree with each other because they are composed of two square aspects, in which way the diameter also consists of two square radiations, namely and, then and, does not proceed. For what disagrees with one, rather agrees with it than disagrees. Moreover, since the opposite radiation also consists of two agreeing ones, namely hexagonal and trigonal: according to this reasoning, the opposition of signs ought to be judged most harmonious, which is absurd. Haly thinks that opposite signs are harmonious for two reasons. The first is, that when one ascends, the other descends, and vice versa: the second, that when it is in one of them, it makes a time contrary to that when it is in the other: just as when it is in, it makes a humid time, in dry. But from the latter cause, this absurdity would follow, that and would be disharmonious, since is no less a vernal sign than the sign II, to which it is opposed. Therefore, the reason previously explained, for strengthening the doctrine of radiations, is more potent, and agrees with Ptolemy's opinion. His words on this matter are these: "The trine and sextile aspects are considered harmonious, because they are composed of homogeneous dodecatemoria, that is, either all feminine or all masculine. But the square and opposite aspects are disharmonious, because they are constituted by dissimilar places." From these words it is also gathered, that the agreement of signs in hexagonal and trigonal aspects, and the disagreement in square and opposite radiations, is not to be understood of temperament and mixture, as the Arabs wish, but only of the sex and nature of the signs, so that signs and II, although joined by hexagonal radiation, are not of the same temperament, Digitized by Google FIRST. 55 temperament, but one is humid, the other dry. Similarly, trine signs agree not in temperament, but in nature and sex, as said above. For all are masculine and diurnal, but the sign is humid and hot, and is hot and dry, is dry and cold, etc. But if someone objects to Ptolemy, that signs which are masculine and diurnal, are also hot and dry: and those which are feminine and nocturnal, are also cold and humid, is not this rightly thought? To this objection we must answer, that such a consequence is by no means necessary, since the condition of time and sex does not arise from the primary qualities. For the diurnal and nocturnal state proceeds from the masculine sex: but the masculine and feminine sex itself is derived from a more efficacious or inefficacious action. Finally, this efficacy flows from the principle of the most robust motion, which exists near the equinoctial. Ptolemy testifies to this in book 1, chapter on masculine and feminine signs, with these words: "The equinoctial circle, described through V and, produces the first and most powerful motion of all." From these, therefore, in continuous series, feminine signs are subjected to masculine, that is, and this virtue is communicated to II and. For these thus look at each other from both principles, namely and a convenient aspect, that is, * and also from themselves. These things being so, it is clear, first, that the sex and diurnal nocturnal condition of the signs derive their origin from motion and not from qualities. Secondly, that not all masculine and diurnal dodecatemoria are rightly said to be hot and dry, nor feminine and nocturnal, humid and cold. 1. Conjunction is numbered among the aspects, which is marked by a single orb, so that the coitus of two bodies in the same line may be signified. From what has been said, it is also clear that the harmful and threatening aspects are the square and opposition: the benevolent ones are the trine and sextile: and the conjunction is indifferent, that is, good with good, bad with bad. As for their strength, the conjunction is the most robust and efficacious of all, after the opposition, because, as appears in concave mirrors, lines passing through the center are the most valid of all, and because Digitized by Google 56 DIFFERENCE that those proceeding from fewer sides are always more efficacious than those from many sides. The third place is held by the square and trine, which are considered almost equal in power. The last and weakest radiation is that which comes from the sextile. Ptolemy adduces two other reasons for radiations, one Geometrical, the other Musical, which I now omit for brevity's sake, and because more faith is given to radiations from experience than for any reasons. All rays, moreover, except the opposite ones, are double, sinister and dexter. Sinister are those which exist before the sign from which we begin, that is, which tend according to the order of the signs: As Hexagon AC, and square AD, and trine AE. Dexter are those which are behind the sign from which we begin, that is, which tend against the order of the signs: As sextile AB, and the rest which descend to the right. Hence it is clear, first, that ray AC is called sinister with respect to A, and dexter with respect to B. Secondly, that stars placed in the upper hemisphere illuminate the horoscope with sinister radiation: but in the lower with dexter radiation, whether they see it from a sextile, or a square, or a trine. And here the question arises, whether dexter rays are of the same power as sinister, or whether one form surpasses the other in strength? I answer by distribution. Rays either to

[Calculating House Cusps]
Let us establish a celestial figure for the 47th minute of the 3rd hour after noon on May 21, 1527, for a region with a latitude of 41 degrees. First, from what has been said, it is clear that the political time defined by us requires no reduction, since, besides the 21 completed days of May, it counts 3 hours and 47 minutes from noon, and therefore it perfectly agrees with the astronomical time sought. With these things thus established, the next step is to extract the Sun's position corresponding to the said time from the tables of motions or ephemerides, and its right ascension from the tables of right ascensions. Having done this, we will find the Sun to be at 8 degrees, 53 minutes, 28 seconds of Gemini, and its right ascension to be 67 degrees, 10 minutes. To this, we now add the arc of the Equator corresponding to the 3 hours and 47 minutes elapsed from noon, namely 56 degrees, 45 minutes. By doing this, we will produce the right ascension of the Midheaven or the Tenth House, approximately 123 degrees, 55 minutes. Continuously adding 30 degrees five times to this, we will find the oblique ascensions of the remaining five eastern houses as follows: Midheaven: 123 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 39 degrees, 30 minutes. Eleventh: 153 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 24 degrees, 30 minutes. Twelfth: 183 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 37 degrees, 30 minutes. First: 213 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 41 degrees, 30 minutes. Second: 243 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 32 degrees, 30 minutes. Third: 273 degrees, 55 minutes, Pole 24 degrees. Now, what remains is to extract the parts of the ecliptic corresponding to these house ascensions from specific latitude tables that serve each. First, by entering the right ascension of the Tenth House, having 123 degrees, 55 minutes, into the area of the table of right ascensions, we will find that it corresponds to approximately 1 degree, 39 minutes of Leo on the left side of the table, assuming a proportional part, which should always be done whenever the ascension number is found exactly in the table area. Similarly, by entering the oblique ascension of the First House, having 213 degrees, 15 minutes, into the table of oblique ascensions constructed for the natal location, that is, for a latitude of 41 degrees, we will find that it corresponds to 26 degrees, 44 minutes of Libra, which should be written on the eastern horizon or on the cusp of the First House. Furthermore, we have previously warned that in this example, the table constructed for a latitude of 24 degrees serves the ascensions of the Eleventh and Third Houses without obvious error. Therefore, in it, for the oblique ascension of the Eleventh, which is 153 degrees, 55 minutes, you will find 6 degrees, 17 minutes of Virgo corresponding. And for the oblique ascension of the Third House, which is 273 degrees, 55 minutes, in the same table, 23 degrees, 26 minutes of Sagittarius correspond. Finally, since the table of oblique ascensions constructed for a latitude of 37 degrees serves the oblique ascensions of the Second and Twelfth Houses, you will find in it, first, for the oblique ascension of the Twelfth House, which is 183 degrees, 55 minutes, 3 degrees, 13 minutes of Libra corresponding. And finally, for the oblique ascension of the Second House, which is 243 degrees, 55 minutes, in the same table, 21 degrees, 55 minutes of Scorpio correspond. You now have calculated the beginnings of the six eastern houses originating from the Midheaven, to which, in the corresponding parts of the opposite signs, the beginnings of the remaining six western houses must be placed. For example, in our case, since 1 degree, 39 minutes of Leo falls on the Midheaven, the beginning of the Fourth House will be placed at 1 degree, 39 minutes of Aquarius. And since we found 26 degrees, 44 minutes of Libra on the cusp of the First House, the Seventh House, which is opposite the ascendant, will begin at 26 degrees, 44 minutes of Aries. Similarly, the beginnings of the remaining four houses, that is, the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Ninth, must be established diametrically opposite the Eleventh, Twelfth, Second, and Third, as is evident in the following description of the celestial chart, to which we have also added the Part of Fortune and the longitudes of all wandering stars. How these are to be extracted from ephemerides for the meridian of any city, we will discuss shortly. Although we should have omitted the more exact circle of tables here, as in the first rudiments of calculations, we will briefly touch upon it, since it is absolutely necessary for establishing exact stellar epochs.

[Planetary Deviations from Ecliptic]
1527. May 21, 3 hours, 47 minutes after noon. Pole 41. Deviation of Planets from the Ecliptic: Sun 19 minutes, 40 seconds. Moon 4 degrees, 26 minutes, 40 seconds. Mercury 28 minutes. Jupiter 4 minutes. Saturn 2 minutes. Mars 52 minutes. Venus 1 degree, 46 minutes. Dragon's Head 1 degree, 25 minutes, 2 seconds. Dragon's Tail 6 degrees, 5 seconds. Part of Fortune 1 degree, 4 minutes, 46 seconds. Ascendant 23 degrees, 5 minutes.

[Erecting a Celestial Figure]
On erecting a celestial figure from the tables of Monteregius' directions according to the equal house system, from which the judgments of the Arabs are said to depend. You should have the right ascension of the Midheaven from the preceding doctrine, and to it add 90 degrees, and you will complete the oblique ascension of the rising cardinal point, from which, from the table of your climate, extract the corresponding degree of the ecliptic, as has been said, and assign it to the cusp of the First House. To the Second House, assign a similar degree of the following sign, and so on, proceeding without omitting any sign until the figure is completed. But from the right ascension of the Midheaven, the corresponding place of the Ecliptic must be extracted from the table of right ascensions, which, designated at the top of the figure, is called the Heart of Heaven. The same celestial chart and for the same place to be erected according to the equal house system.

[Constructing a Rational Figure]
ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CELESTIAL FIGURE according to the rational method of Monteregius from the tables of the equation of the twelve houses. First, it must be seen that if the proposed time is civil, it should be transformed into astronomical time in the manner explained a little earlier. Second, the Sun's place for the completed day's meridian must be extracted from the tables of motions or the ephemeris. Third, inquire about the said place, or rather the completed degree of the Sun, in the table of the houses of the sky for the elevation of your location, or for the nearest lesser or greater latitude to your location, under the title of the tenth house. Having done this, you will find the position of the sky and which parts of the zodiac are at the beginnings of the individual eastern houses at the time of the meridian. Therefore, if your time precisely coincides with the meridian, the beginnings of the said six houses will immediately present themselves to the right, and nothing further will remain to be investigated from the table. But if hours or minutes of hours are attached to the completed day at the meridian, then in the same place in the table, describe the time placed on the left side, to which you always add individual minutes of hours for every 15 minutes of degrees of the Sun (for 15 minutes of the equator rise in the space of one minute of time). Fourth, to the time described from the table, add your time in hours and minutes, for which you have decided to construct the houses of the sky: diligently observe this, that for every six added hours, you always add individual minutes of time for the sake of the equation of days, for one revolution of the sky is completed in approximately 24 hours and 4 minutes. You will also observe the rule of astronomical calculation, which warns that whenever, from such a composition of hours, a time emerges that exceeds 24 hours, those same 24 hours must be removed from the total aggregate and completely discarded, and the remainder preserved. Fifth, these hours and minutes, which result from the combination of the two times, or remain after the removal of 24 hours, look for them in the table of houses constructed for the latitude of your region in its left margin.

[Eastern and Western Houses]
In its left margin, for the regions to the right, the beginnings or cusps of the six houses of the sky will present themselves, namely the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, first, second, and third houses. However, with the eastern hemisphere thus described, the six western stations are known from the opposite signs. In the proposed example, the Sun's place is 8 degrees, 54 minutes of Gemini, which in this matter is safely estimated as the completed ninth degree. I therefore look for this ninth degree of Gemini in the table constructed for a latitude of 42 degrees (for the common ephemerides do not have a closer one) under the title of the tenth house, and I find on the left side of the table the corresponding time elapsed from noon, namely 4 hours, 29 minutes, which, added to our afternoon time, that is, 3 hours, 47 minutes, makes 8 hours, 16 minutes, which number...

[House Cusps and Ascensions]
In the left part of the table, the time is found not exactly, but approximately greater, that is, 28 hours, 17 minutes. From this region, the eastern hemisphere is described, namely, the cusp of the tenth house is 2 degrees, 2 minutes; the eleventh house is 7 degrees, 0 minutes; the twelfth house is 7 degrees, 0 minutes; the first house is 27 degrees, 2 minutes; the second house is 22 degrees, 0 minutes; the third house is 24 degrees, 0 minutes. The remaining six western houses are known from the opposite signs, as I said. The method of erecting a figure of the heavens according to the author's opinion follows. At the given time, first find the right ascension of the Midheaven, which, as we said, is composed of the right ascension of the Sun's place and the degrees of the equinoctial generated by the time elapsed from noon. Then, to this right ascension, add a quadrant of the circle, that is, 90 parts, and the oblique ascension of the Ascendant will result. From the table constructed for the latitude of your place, extract the corresponding part of the ecliptic, and then calculate the semi-diurnal and semi-nocturnal arcs of that already found part of the ecliptic, and take the third part of each calculated arc. Now, to establish the cusps of the six eastern houses, first, to the right ascension of the Midheaven, add in order three times the third part of the semi-diurnal arc, so that the right ascensions of the eleventh, twelfth, and first houses are produced. Then, to the right ascension of the first house, add in order twice the third part of the semi-nocturnal arc, and you will establish the right ascensions of the second and third houses. Finally, since the horoscoping part is known from the preceding, it remains for us to extract the appropriate parts for the remaining five houses, for all of which the table of right ascensions serves. Having found these, we will have the centers of the eastern houses readily available, and we will establish the remaining six western houses through the opposite points as before. As in our example, the right ascension of the Midheaven is 123 parts, 55 minutes. If we add a quadrant of the circle to this, that is, 90 parts, we will find the oblique ascension of the Ascendant to be 213 parts, 55 minutes. To this, in the table constructed for a latitude of 41 parts, corresponds 26 parts, 44 minutes of Libra. The semi-diurnal arc of this horoscoping part is 80 parts, 52 minutes, and its third portion is approximately 26 parts, 57 minutes. And the semi-nocturnal arc is 99 parts, 8 minutes, and its third portion is approximately 33 parts, 3 minutes. These being so, if you add in order to the right ascension of the Midheaven 26 parts, 47 minutes, which is the third portion of the semi-diurnal arc of the horoscoping part, you will produce the right ascension of the eleventh, twelfth, and first houses. And indeed, for the eleventh, 150 parts, 42 minutes; for the twelfth, 178 parts, 29 minutes; and finally, for the first, 205 parts, 16 minutes. Now, if the third part of the semi-nocturnal arc, containing 33 parts, 3 minutes, is added twice in order to the right ascension of the first house, the right ascension of the second and third houses will result. And indeed, for the second, 238 parts, 19 minutes; for the third, 271 parts, 22 minutes. Moreover, in the table of right ascensions, to the right ascension of the eleventh station corresponds 28 parts, 45 minutes of Gemini; to the twelfth, 28 parts, 40 minutes of Virgo; to the second, 0 parts, 30 minutes of Cancer; and finally, to the third, 1 part, 14 minutes of Leo. The culminating and horoscoping parts of the Ecliptic never change, but are always found and remain the same in all methods, that is, those of Regiomontanus, the Arabs, the author, and Campanus. I omit here the method of constructing figures of the heavens according to Campanus and Gazulus because it is erroneous. I could have omitted the author's method for a similar reason, had it not been necessary for the exposition of the text. For here we only approve the opinion of Regiomontanus, which is also Ptolemy's, or certainly approaches his opinion as closely as possible. If there is anyone who also wishes to reduce Campanus's speculation on the twelve houses to numbers, let him consult problem 16 of Regiomontanus. The first figure of the author. May 21, 3 hours, 47 minutes past noon. Pole 41. Regarding the motions of the seven planets and the head and tail of the Dragon, to be found for any hour of the day and placed in the figure of the heavens. A complete figure of the heavens consists, first, of the description of the houses, namely, the 4 cardinal, 4 succedent, and 4 cadent houses. Second, of the inscription of the true places of the seven wandering stars, also the head and tail of the Dragon. Third, the notation of fixed stars of the first and second magnitude, whose latitude from the Ecliptic is not great. Fourth and finally, of the inscription of the lots and other parts. And thus far it has been said how, for any moment of time, the figure of the heavens, according to the opinion of both Regiomontanus and other astrologers, should be formed, so that it may be seen which signs are above the earth and which lie below the earth, and which parts of the dodecatemoria fall on the cusps of the individual houses. It remains, therefore, for us to briefly complete the remaining members of the celestial figure. It has been said above that all motions written in the usual ephemerides are calculated for the meridian of the day to which their number adheres. However, since the same motions vary at every moment of the days due to the continuous motion of the spheres, it is necessary to present a method by which the motion of any planet for any moment of time should be calculated from the ephemeris. Therefore, take the motions of the planets that are assigned opposite your proposed day, and write them out in order. Then, immediately place above them the motions of the same planets for the immediately following day, and subtract the smaller from the larger, for the excess or the difference of the numbers will show the diurnal motions of the planets, as is evident in the following example of the proposed nativity. May 22, 9 degrees, 46 minutes, 9 degrees, 10 minutes, 28 seconds, 23 degrees, 27 minutes, 29 seconds, 29 degrees, 1 minute, 27 seconds, 504, 21 degrees, 25 minutes, 22 seconds. May 21, 8 degrees, 44 minutes, 25 seconds, 6 degrees, 28 minutes, 16 seconds, 27 degrees, 16 minutes, 29 seconds, 21 degrees, 26 minutes, 38 seconds, 3 degrees, 12 minutes, 25 seconds. Super. or 0 degrees, 57 minutes, 14 seconds, 14 degrees, 40 minutes, 40 seconds, 4 degrees, 7 minutes, 0 seconds, 13 degrees, 0 minutes, 2001, 12 degrees, 1 minute, 9 seconds, 0 degrees, 3 minutes, 1 second. Diurnal motion. After this, one must proceed according to the rule of proportions in this way: In the first place, set 24 hours, into which the entire natural day is divided. In the second place, place the differences of the motions or the diurnal motions. The third place should be occupied by the hours elapsed from noon, together with the minutes, for which the motion is proposed to be sought. The fourth number, which is elicited from the progression of the rule of proportions, is to be added to the motion of your complete day if the planet is direct, that is, when its motion written in the ephemeris increases. But if it is retrograde, that is, if its motion written in the ephemeris decreases, it must be subtracted from the same, so that the motion corresponding to the proposed time may result. Here it must be observed that the Sun and Moon are swifter than the other wanderers, and therefore never retrograde. Likewise, the Head of the Dragon always progresses in antecedents.

[Planetary Positions and Time Correction]
Having observed all these things, add the complete month of May, 3 hours, 47 minutes. You will collect the true longitudes of the planets from Stoffler's ephemerides, calculated as follows: Sun 8 degrees, 58 minutes; Moon 27 degrees, 19 minutes; Mercury 28 degrees, 17 minutes; Venus 27 degrees, 18 minutes; Mars 29 degrees, 18 minutes; Jupiter 26 degrees, 49 minutes; Saturn 3 degrees, 23 minutes; Dragon's Head 25 degrees, 25 minutes. Lords: Aquarius, Aries, Gemini, Scorpio, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius. However, these motions, collected in this manner, still need to be corrected for two reasons. One is the distance between meridians, the other is the equation of days. But just as both are necessary for scrutinizing the true motion of the Moon, so in collecting the motions of the other planets, they are safely neglected due to their slow progression, especially when we extract the motions of the stars from ephemerides not adapted to the Prutenic but to the Alphonsine calculation, and therefore showing the positions of the stars not precisely, but approximately. Therefore, leaving aside the six planets, you must correct the Moon's course as follows: First, in the tables of regions, which are commonly added to ephemerides, under the character (region), the minutes of degrees are noted for any given place, by which the Moon's motion, taken from the ephemeris for the proposed time, must be augmented or diminished due to the meridians or the position of the place, as indicated by the letters A and M added to these minutes. The table of provinces and more recent towns, which precedes Stoffler's ephemerides, does not have our example's location inserted. Therefore, we must refer to a place in Spain whose longitude agrees with or at least does not differ much from the longitude of Valladolid, such as the longitude of the city of Cordoba, from whose region under the character (we find) 42 minutes, which must be added to the Moon's true motion, because the meridian described through Cordoba is so much more western than the Ulm meridian, for which Stoffler compiled the ephemerides. Finally, the minutes, which must always be subtracted from the same motion due to the equation of days, will be indicated by the common angle of the following table, if in its left margin you take the Sun's position for the proposed day, and in the head of the table the sign in which the Sun is located. As in the previous example, ten minutes are indicated, which, being subtracted from the Moon's motion, and those which the difference of meridians produced for us being added to it, the Moon's motion, corrected in all ways, becomes 27 degrees, 51 minutes of Aquarius. The table of the Moon's motion follows. 2437 hours must be subtracted, so that the time starting from midnight remains. For example, in our case for the year 1527, 21 days are proposed as completed at noon, with 3 hours, 47 minutes elapsed from noon. Therefore, if you subtract twelve hours from this, you will have the remaining time starting from midnight: 20 days of May, 15 hours, 47 minutes. And this is the first thing worthy of consideration in our calculation. Secondly, this time must be corrected by the difference of meridians, that is, it must be translated to the meridian of the place for which the motions are calculated. You will achieve this if you subtract the difference of longitude or meridians converted into time from the proposed time, when your meridian is more eastern than the meridian of the tables, or if you add it to the same when it is more western, because eastern places count more hours, and therefore they must be subtracted; western places, however, count fewer, and therefore they must be added, so that the time prepared for the meridian of the tables exists. As in our example of Königsberg in Prussia, for whose meridian the Prutenic tables were compiled, the longitude is 46 degrees, 45 minutes, 1 second. The longitude of Valladolid, however, is 8 degrees, 20 minutes. The difference of meridians is therefore 38 degrees, 25 minutes, 1 second, which converted into time makes two hours, 33 minutes, 3 seconds, to be added to the proposed time, because Valladolid, a city in Spain, is so much more western than Königsberg in Prussia. If you wish to use the table of regions for brevity's sake, and immediately calculate the positions of the stars for a given meridian other than the meridian of the tables, which is what we are doing here, look for your location in the catalog of places, or one closer to it, and add the ascribed time difference to your time if the letter S is present, or subtract it if A is present, so that in this matter of ours you do the opposite of the notes themselves. The location of our example is not noted in the Prutenic catalog, but nearby locations, such as Toledo, Cordoba, Compostela, are, for which a nearly prior time difference is found with the letter S indicating that such a difference must be added to our time for the hours to be adapted to the meridian of Königsberg, contrary to what the notes actually signify. For in the catalog of notable places, the more eastern locations of the tables have the note of addition A, while the more western ones have the note S. For these notes are specifically intended for such calculations, so that the same motion calculated for the meridian of the tables corresponds to different hours of another meridian. Thirdly, by the Sun's position, which the ephemerides will always easily show you, the prothaphaeresis or equation of days should be instituted. As in our example, because the ephemerides showed the Sun's position to be almost in 9 degrees of Gemini, therefore from the first Canon of the Equation of Natural Days, the prothaphaeresis of 9 minutes of days is collected, designated by the title S indicating subtraction. For these titles A and S have a place when apparent time is converted into equality, but the opposite must be done with these titles when equal time is in turn to be converted into apparent. Therefore, the time of our example, corrected both for the meridians and for the equation of days, is as follows: For the complete year 1526, 4 complete months, 20 days, 18 hours, 11 minutes, 4 seconds. Finally, the Julian time, reduced and conformed to astronomical equality by the methods we have discussed, must be adapted to the Alphonsine Abacus from the congruent table, which is found on folio 7 and following. For the Alphonsine method, in which, for collecting the equal motions of the stars, Julian time is reduced to sexagenaries of days and minutes, is shorter and, as it seems, more suitable than others. However, you should seek fuller instruction for this part from the third Prutenic precept, according to whose tenor we have preferred to describe only the diagram of our example here, rather than obscure the matter with a verbose narration in an unsuitable place. Sexagenaries 3, 2, 1. Days 1, 2. Year 1500: 2, 32, 11, 15, 2, 6, 8, 38, 16. Common months 4: 3, 0. Days 20: 20. Hours 18: 45 minutes, 1 second. 11 minutes, 27 seconds, 30 degrees. 2, 10, 250. Sum: 2, 34, 51, 5, 45, 27, 55. Therefore, the time suitable for Alphonsine calculation will be 2 third sexagenaries, 34 second sexagenaries, 51 first sexagenaries, 5 days, 45 minutes, 27 seconds, 15 thirds. In this way, given the time for use.

[Calculating Equinoctial Precession]
For the calculation of equal motions, you must use the Alphonsine method for collecting the mean motions of the stars. I do not describe it here, as it is clearly demonstrated with examples in the eighth Prussian precept. There follows the calculation of the true precession of the equinox, that is, the computation of the true precession of the equinox. Alphonsus derives these computations from the vernal intersection, which is now known to have changed completely, more than needs to be proven here at length. Hence it is to be seen the reason why Copernicus and Erasmus state that the points of the equinoxes, as well as the nodes of the Moon, Anabibazonta and Catabibazonta, are in precession, and they imagine two equinoxes, namely the mean and the true: the former indeed which recedes regularly, but the latter which recedes anomalously from the head of the starry Aries. Therefore, the precession of the equinoxes is the arc of the Ecliptic intercepted between two great circles, each of which is drawn through the poles of the Zodiac, but one through the first star of the starry Aries, and the other through the point of the equinox, whether true or mean. The difference between the mean and apparent equinox is called the prothaphaeresis of the equinoxes, which is at most 71 first minutes, 22 second minutes, as can be seen in the Canon of Prosthaphæreses of the eighth sphere. Since therefore the points of the equinoxes are not fixed, motions more correctly begin from the head of the starry Aries, that is, a certain and fixed beginning in the eighth sphere. Then, however, they add the precession of the equinoxes to the discovered motions of the stars, so that their true places from the vernal equinox may be collected. Hence it is clear that before any computation of the wandering stars, it is necessary that we first find out by how many parts the apparent equinox has receded in precession from the first star of Aries. The form of the calculation is as follows: For the given time, correctly prepared, collect the equal motion of the mean vernal equinox, or the equal precession, by adding it with its Epoch. For in collecting equal motions, the Epochs of Christ God, or Alexander, or Caesar, or another beginning from which equal motions are derived, must always be prefixed. Then, with the same effort, extract the simple anomaly of the equinoxes, which, when doubled, you then collect the prosthaphæresis of the equinoxes from the convenient Canon of Prosthaphæreses, and correct it by the proportional part if necessary. And if the double anomaly is less than a semicircle, that is, 180 parts, then the Prosthaphæresis is subtracted from the equal motion of precession; if greater, the same Prosthaphæresis is combined with the equal motion of the precession of the equinoxes, so that in the aggregate or remainder the true and apparent precession of the equinoxes for the given time emerges. The rule for the addition or subtraction of the anomaly of the equinoxes therefore agrees with the rule for the addition and subtraction of the Solar Anomaly. According to these, the computation of our example will be as follows: Sexagesimal 1. P. 12. 22. Simple precession of the equinoxes. 0. 26. 50. 37. Simple anomaly of the equinoxes. 2. 46. 48. 3. Doubled anomaly. 5. 33. 36. 6. Corrected Prosthaphæresis. 0. 0. 31. 44. But since this exceeds the semicircle of the double anomaly, it must be added to the simple precession of the equinoxes, after which, the true precession of the equinoxes comes out as six parts, 27.22.12.21.22. The calculation of the solar motion, that is, the computation of the true or apparent solar motion. Erasmus, in his tables, provided two methods for computing the true motion of the Sun. In one, he uses the simple motion of the Sun, which is equally derived from the first point of the starry Aries; in the other, he assumes the motion of the Sun derived from the mean equinox, which he calls the composite motion of the Sun, because he only adds to the simple motion as much as the equal precession of the equinoxes. But we will briefly touch upon only the other method, in which equal motions flow from the first star of Aries, because it is common to the calculation of the subsequent stars. The method of calculation is as follows: FIRST, have these four ready: 1. The true precession of the equinoxes. 2. The simple anomaly of the equinoxes, both of which are taken from the preceding computation of the precession of the equinoxes. 3. The equal motion of the Sun. 4. The motion of the annual anomaly (with their respective established Epochs added in both cases). The motion of the Sun, which depends on the Apogee. SECOND, by means of the simple anomaly of the equinoxes, two things are drawn from the canon of the Prosthaphæreses of the Sun, namely, the prosthaphæresis of the center, and the proportional minutes. This prosthaphæresis of the center, or as it is commonly called, the equation of the argument, is nothing other than the difference between the mean and true Apogee, which, just as it is added before the semicircle of the annual anomaly of the Sun, so it is subtracted from it after the semicircle, to obtain the true and corrected anomaly of the Sun. THIRD, by means of the fourth anomaly, with one and the same entry into the table of the Prosthaphæreses of the Sun, these two are sought: namely, the equation or prosthaphæresis of the orb and the subsequent excess, of which the part corresponding to the proportional minutes reserved a little earlier must always be added to the prosthaphæresis of the orb, so that the absolute or corrected equation may emerge. Finally, if the equated anomaly of the Sun is less than a semicircle, then the corrected equation of the orb is subtracted from the equal motion of the Sun, so that the true place of the Sun from the head of the starry Aries may emerge. To this, if the true precession of the vernal equinox is finally added, discarding the entire cycle if necessary, the true place of the Sun from the apparent equinox will appear in signs, parts, and minutes. As in our assumed example: Sexagesimal P. 1a 2a 3a 4a True precession of the equinoxes 0 27 22 21 Simple anomaly of the equinoxes 2 46. 48 3 51.3 Equal simple motion 0 40.39 27 21 321 Annual anomaly 5 28.58 7 16:53: Prosthaphæresis of the center added 0 0 55 25 33.48. Proportional minutes 0 0 54.35.36 Equated anomaly 5:30 53 32 50 41 T2. The first equation of the orb added 0 0 52 21 38 49. Subsequent excess. 0 0 14 55 0 41. Proportional part of the excess 0 0 13 34 21 to be added. Equated equation of the orb added 0 0 52 34 13 10. Hence the true place from the head 0 41 32 1 34 2. And the true place from the equinox, 1 8 54 22 34 2 apparent. Therefore, the Sun at the time of the proposed nativity falls in 8 degrees, 54 minutes, 22 seconds of Gemini, which motion differs from the motion of Stoffler's ephemerides by almost 5 first minutes. The calculation of the lunar motion. First, these two are assumed from the preceding: 1. True precession of the equinox. 2. Equal simple motion. 1. Elongation of the Moon. Then, from the appropriate tables, two others are extracted: 1. Anomaly of the Moon, or as they call it, the mean argument. (1. Of the second epicycle, or as it is commonly called, the center of the Prosthaphæresis A or S. With these established, the longitude of the Moon from the Sun is immediately doubled, and by that double, that is, by the distance of the center of the epicycle from the Apogee, two things are sought: 2. Proportional minutes. Less is added. And if the doubled elongation, that is, if the center of the Moon is a semicircle, then the Prosthaphæresis of the second epicycle is subtracted from the lunar motion, so that the true motion may be obtained.

[Planetary Placement and Latitude]
158. The difference is filled, however, by observing the series and multitude of degrees. For example, in our case, the Sun's place is 8 degrees, 54 minutes of Gemini. Since this dodecatemorion is found in the eighth house, and its eighth or rather ninth part, following the cusp of the eighth and preceding the cusp of the ninth, falls into the eighth house, we must therefore also insert the Sun's place into the eighth house. And by the same reasoning, the other stars are to be inserted into the remaining stations of the heavens into which they fall, as can be seen in the figures described above. Others pursue these matters more subtly, taking into account not only the longitude but also the latitude of the stars. In this way, if stars endowed with some latitude are found in parts of the signs existing in the middle or around the middle of any house, they will be correctly placed in the same houses, just as if they lacked latitude. But if a planet has a significant latitude, and is moreover near the cusp of some house, artificers show that it can happen that it falls sometimes into the succeeding house, sometimes into the preceding one, due to its deviation to the sides. But those who wish to, should seek an exact judgment of this matter from the 21st problem of Monteregius's tables. To me, this care seems superfluous, and what is more, alien to Ptolemy's opinion. For since Ptolemy neglected the latitudes of the planets in directions, it is consistent that he much more disregarded them in the distribution of stars through the houses of the figure of the heavens, especially since he attributes power to the stars, as will appear more widely below, not from the place of latitude, but from the parts of the Ecliptic, which are defined by lines passing through the centers of the stars and through both poles of the Ecliptic. Just as Palilicium has power around the middle of the fourth part of Gemini, not because the orb of its rays extends so far, but because the line drawn through the center of the star and the poles of the Zodiac passes through the said point of the Ecliptic. And let what has been said here about the constitution of the celestial figure suffice. For concerning the Part of Fortune and other parts to be found, it will be said below in the fifth difference. The fourth part, which is from the ascendant to the midheaven, which is the twelfth, eleventh, and tenth house, is called the eastern, masculine, and approaching fourth part. It signifies the beginning of life; it is called puerile, sanguine, vernal. And the other part, which is from the midheaven to the degree of the western sign, that is, the seventh, which is above the circle of the western hemisphere, which is the ninth, eighth, and seventh house, is southern, feminine, receding; it signifies middle age; and is called the progression of youth, aestival, choleric. The third part also, which is from the west to the degree of the fourth house, which is above the meridian circle below the earth, which is the sixth, fifth, and fourth house, is western, masculine, approaching; it signifies the end of life; and is called autumnal, melancholic, and is senile; and is of middle age. The fourth part, which is from the fourth house to the ascendant, that is, the third, second, and ascendant house, is northern, feminine, receding. It signifies what happens to a person after their death, and to what their body will come, or its disposition from the substance left behind, or what will be said of them, namely, whether they will be praised or blamed. And this part is called senile, defective, phlegmatic, hiemal. And those two parts, which are from the midheaven to the ascendant, and from the ascendant to the fourth house, make up the half which is called the ascending half. The remaining parts, which are from the fourth house to the seventh, and thence to the midheaven, constitute the descending half. And whatever is above the earth from the circle, that is, the upper part of the circle, is called right; whatever lies below the earth, that is, the lower part, is called left. And the ascendant, fourth, seventh, and tenth are called angles, as it sounds more beautiful. And the second, eighth, fifth, and eleventh houses are called succedent to the angles. But the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth are called cadent from the angles. Therefore, when a planet is in the angles or their succedents, it is said to prosper; and if it is in the cadent houses from the angles, it is said to decline. And each of these houses signifies something about human beings. This is the other member of the distribution of the fortuitous heaven. For after briefly touching upon the division of the heaven into unstable parts, he now intends to describe the familiarity of these parts with the subject matters. He begins this matter with the quadrants of the heaven, which are distinguished by the horizon and the meridian circle, and compares them, as he did above in the exposition of the stable parts of the heaven, to the seasons of the year, the regions of the world, sex, ages, and the four humors. Just as the diurnal or its equinoctial motion, which is the effector and constant commutator of these unstable parts, is opposed to the other motion proper to the stars traversing the zodiac: so also the numbering or series or order of the unstable quadrants of the heaven is opposed to the stable ones, and thence extends to the opposite part of the world. For the stable quadrants, of which we spoke above, which two circles passing through the poles of the zodiac and the cardinal points make, are numbered by consequent signs: but these, which the meridian and the setting encompass, by preceding ones. Hence it results that the quadrant which is from the east to the south is the first: that which is placed between the western horizon and the midheaven, the second: that which is between the west and the middle of the night, the third: finally, that which is concluded by the imum coeli and the eastern setting, the fourth. As for the sex of the quadrants, this author agrees with Ptolemy, for both make the first and third quadrants masculine, the second and fourth feminine. But Ptolemy's words on this matter are these: "And they also say that the stars are feminized and masculinized according to how they are configured with respect to the horizon. For they are masculine as if eastern in the quadrant from the east to the midheaven, and from the west to the imum coeli: but in the other two quadrants they are feminine as if western." Hence it is clear that artificers wish the energy of acting and the sex of the planets to change according to the ascent of the world to the meridian circle or its descent from the same. For first, from the ascendant to the midheaven, they always ascend higher, then from the meridian zenith, inclining towards the west, they descend: and again from the west, approaching the imum coeli, they ascend, and finally from here until they reach the eastern horizon, they descend. By this reasoning, the author also named the first and third quadrants approaching, and the other two receding. The work of the Moon clearly shows us that this way is true, for when it ascends to either meridian, it excites a great influx of marine waters: and conversely, when it descends from the meridian to the western or eastern horizon, it remits them and causes reflux. These things being so, the common error is clear, of calling the two continuous quadrants constituting the eastern half masculine, and the other two feminine because they are placed in the western half. For the half of the world distinguished by the eastern horizon is called the ascending half, and the opposite of this the descending, with respect to the vertical point alone, and not with respect to both meridians, namely the upper and the subterranean, which we particularly consider here. The knowledge of this matter is useful both for recognizing the strength of the stars and for judging the significators of masculine and feminine births. The first quadrant is eastern, the second southern, the third western.

[Ptolemy's Quadrants and Qualities]
The fourth is western, the fourth is northern, as Ptolemy also says. And there is no doubt about the eastern and western regions. But why is the perpetually hidden part of the sky attributed to the north, and the perpetually apparent part to the south, and vice versa, the perpetually apparent midheaven to the southern region, and the perpetually hidden part to the north? This is due to the similarity of qualities. For just as midday is the beginning of extreme heat, so from the southern part and from the torrid zone, the greatest heat proceeds. And midnight is the beginning of the greatest cold, the cause of which is also the north wind. However, the author, comparing these same quadrants to the seasons of the year, ages, and humors, leaves Ptolemy and follows the common and vulgar opinion on this matter. For he likens the first part of the world, situated between the eastern horizon and the midheaven, to spring, the second to summer, the third to autumn, and the fourth to winter. But Ptolemy, on the contrary, makes the first quadrant dry, the second hot, the third humid, and the fourth cold. Indeed, in the second and fourth quadrants, they almost agree, but in the first and third, they differ. For Ptolemy wants the eastern part to be not humid like spring, but rather dry, and the opposite part, which extends from the west to the imum coeli, not dry like autumn, but rather humid, so that the whole day is dry and the whole night is humid. His words are these: "Similarly, the fourth part of the horizon, the fourth of the angles, from which the winds blowing throughout the parts have their origins in the angles, the one towards the east is itself dry, because of the heat that occurs there, drying up the parts moistened by the night; and the winds blowing from it, which are commonly called Apeliotes, are dry and drying. The place towards the south is itself very hot, because of the fire of the midheaven and the inclination of our inhabited world towards the south; and the winds blowing from it, which are commonly called Notus, are hot and rarefying. The place towards the west is itself humid, because of the rain that occurs there, moistening the parts dried by the day; and the winds blowing from it, which are commonly called Zephyrus, are moist and humidifying. The place towards the north is itself very cold, because of the cold that occurs there."

[The Four Angles and Their Qualities]
In the same way, the four terminating angles are also distributed, from which the winds occupying those entire parts arise. The East indeed has a great deal of dryness, because when the Sun is there, the humidity excited during the night begins to dry up. And the winds blowing from there, which are commonly called subsolani, are dry and desiccating. But the southern region is very hot, both because of the Sun's inflammations in the middle of the sky, and because the Sun's culminations in the location of our regions incline most towards the south. The winds also blowing from there, which we generally call nothos, are hot and rarefying. However, the western place is humid, because when the Sun illuminates it, the humidity exhausted during the day then first begins to spread. The winds also erupting from there, which they call favonios, are soft and moist. But the northern place is cold, because, due to the position of our earth, it is very far from the Sun's culminations that produce heat, just as the Sun, while ascending the subterranean south, is very far from us. And the winds that blow from there, commonly called aquilones, are cold and congealing. From all these, both the tradition of the Arabs and Ptolemy concerning the nature of the four quarters of the world, as well as their agreement or disagreement, can be made manifest. But how this diversity of opinions is to be reconciled, or if it cannot be reconciled at all, how one opinion is to be rejected and the remaining one approved and defended by reasons consistent with nature, is not so clear or readily apparent; indeed, it seems very difficult. For it is not probable that Ptolemy, in these suddenly changeable parts of the sky, which are distinguished by the southern and terminating circles, departed without some grave cause from the usual order received from nature, which he faithfully observed not only in the four quarters of the year, but also in the configurations of other stars to the Sun. For just as he made spring hot and humid, summer hot and dry, autumn dry and cold, winter cold and humid, in the same way he afterwards taught that the stars from the first emergence of the Sun to the quadrangular configuration with the Sun are humid like spring; from the first quarter to the opposition, hot like summer; from the opposition to the second quarter, dry like autumn; and finally from there to the occultation, cold. This natural order plainly seems to require that in the same way the first of the four angles of the world be believed to be humid and hot; the second, hot and dry; the third, dry and cold; and finally the fourth, cold and humid. But Ptolemy not only neglects this law, but completely inverts it. For he makes the East, which according to this reasoning ought to be humid, dry, and he says the West, which by common tradition is dry, is humid. On the contrary, the Arabs seem not only to observe the customary order here, but also to be able to confirm their opinion by the authority of men most skilled in nature. For Hippocrates, and all his school of Asclepiads, compares the first quadrant of the day, which is contained by the eastern horizon and the terminator, to spring and sanguine humor; the second, to summer and bile; the third, to autumn and melancholic humor; the fourth, to winter and phlegm. To these, among many other things that can be objected to Ptolemy, this is also very serious, that he assigns only one quality to these parts of the day, and indeed in such a way that wherever you begin to enumerate the series of qualities, you are always thrown into an order repugnant to natural actions, namely from hot to dry, from dry to humid, from humid to cold, from cold to dry: which process is absurdly instituted against the law of natural actions. For we see matter first dissolved and slightly heated by ordered heat; then it becomes hot and dries out, and finally, having dried out, it becomes cold. Thus, bodies do not dry out because of cold, but they become cold because of dried-out humidity. And children do not become humid because they are hot, but because they are humid, they therefore become hot. These individual points can so disturb an unperturbed reader that he always doubts whether Ptolemy or the Arabs are more to be believed. Pontanus also, in his copious exposition of this passage, brought forward nothing but a bare exposition of the words. And Hali noted nothing worthy of observation here, except that he gathers from Ptolemy's words that the qualities of the southern region are changed into the qualities of the northern part by reason of the inhabitants. "Ptolemy," he says, "said very well when he said with respect to our dwellings: Because if we suppose that there is some population in the southern part, the north will be to those who dwell there in the manner that the south is to us. Because to us the south is hot and burning with respect to our dwellings, because the Sun is in the direct part of that region all year, and it makes many reverberations of rays." Only Cardanus do I find to have truly looked into the matter in this place. "The meaning of Ptolemy's words," he says, "is that such a time, such a part of the sky, and such a wind, which has its origin from the east to the south, is dry in quality and action, not in substance, nor does it couple another quality to it. The reason is that in things of short duration, one must consider actions, which are vehement, and these produce qualities, not substances. For substance requires concoction, concoction requires time, but time is short and very small: Therefore, planets and fixed stars change qualities, not substances, in parts of the day and sky. Therefore, it is not inconvenient for an action to pass from dry to hot, or from hot to humid. But here perhaps someone will doubt how primary qualities, insofar as they are substances, are to be distinguished from primary qualities, which are accidents and impressions, that is, how, for example, hot is sometimes transferred to a quality, and sometimes to a body or substance. I answer that the names of qualities are sometimes transferred anomymously or denominatively to the whole body from inherent qualities. For we call a body hot according to substance, a subject body receiving alternately and by turns contrary qualities, that is, heat, coldness, humidity, and dryness. Hence, when we name much or little hot, we refer to the quantity of the substance. For example, if there are two equal vessels, but filled with unequally tempered liquid of water and wine: then we would rightly say that one vessel contains more wine and more heat, and the other more water and less heat. For wine is hot by its nature. It is similar if two vessels are unequal in magnitude, but nevertheless are supposed to be filled with equally tempered liquid. But indeed, when we look not at the abundance of substance or subject, but only at the quality, we say that there is more heat in the former, and less in the latter, which must be understood differently. For example, if two equal vessels are filled with unequally heated liquid, then we would say that the hotter one contains more heat, and the colder one less. And here there is a clear catachresis in the word 'more', if indeed properly and better 'more' or 'less', 'more vehemently' or 'more weakly', and similar words are accommodated to qualities: but 'little' and 'much' are rightly observed only in the quantity of the substance. Similarly, it is manifest that both substances and qualities are subject to alterations. For to speak first of qualities, the substance of oil now receives heat infused from continuous motion or elsewhere; now again, due to rest or otherwise, the quality of heat is expelled and it becomes cold. This same substance, when it consists of a vaporous, oily, and well-concocted air, if subjected to fire, feeds a tranquil flame. But if, striving to preserve the entire quantity of the substance, one restores the parts of the oil consumed by heat through continuous addition of watery parts, that substance will always become worse, and the flame, due to the impure and crude matter acceding, will multiply its crackling, and finally

[The Nature of Heat and Cold]
The concocted parts will be extinguished by the crudity of the unconcocted parts. This natural action is also observed in our bodies. The substance sustaining vital heat exists in its purest form from the beginning, for it consists of well-concocted seminal and watery menstrual fluid, and for this reason, it participates in very little earthly substance. But since it is necessary for the parts consumed by vital heat to be continuously restored, and indeed for the underlying substance itself to be amplified, and those parts, daily consumed through the organs of nutrition and added to the bodies, so that the lost may be restored, are more impure and more earthy, it is clear that the substance or subject of that vital and innate heat is continuously attenuated, until at last, having become completely earthy and desiccated, it denies nourishment to the vital flame, and renders the body itself subject to death. Hence Hippocrates rightly stated, in Aphorism 14, that children are warmer with innate heat than those who are in the vigor of youth or have fallen into old age. Lycus, therefore, by transferring the word 'hot' to quality, falsely slandered Hippocrates, contending to show that a more vehement heat is present in a consistent age than in childhood. For Hippocrates did not deny this here either, who did not refer to the quality, but to the substance of heat, and wished the bodies of children to possess not a sharper quality of heat, but a greater abundance of innate substance, and one apt to sustain vital heat. For, as we just said, those who are in a consistent age have a more earthy body, and although it may be very vehemently hot, it has very little of the substance of innate heat; otherwise, we would say that those seized by a feverish heat have a great deal of innate heat, when they not only do not have more, but not even an equal amount to the former. Just as in our bodies, so also in celestial bodies, we must consider and understand these alterations of both substances and qualities. And indeed, the substances of celestial bodies, just as they consist of the multitude, density, and purity of light, so they are varied by the same difference of light. Qualities, however, proceed either from the strength or weakness of substances, or from a similar quality: just as heat proceeds from much heat or from hotness; cold, however, from little heat or coldness. But someone might say, how can heat produce coldness? I believe that those who diligently adhered to Aristotle's doctrine of the nature of things could never extricate themselves from these ambiguities, especially Cardano, who for that reason, having abandoned the chorus of Aristotelians, presented the nature of qualities differently: There are, he says, only two qualities: one active and celestial, and it is called heat, since in the stars nothing exists besides heat, to which coldness is opposed, which is nothing else than the privation of heat. The other quality, namely humidity, is not in the heavens, but in the globe of the elements. For humid and dry are the affections of the subject bodies. To humidity, however, dryness is opposed as a privation. Therefore, a hot body is one that is compacted from abundant light; a cold one, however, where there is little light and heat. And the body of the elements is humid, which abounds in well-concocted vapor; and dry, which is deprived of that humid substance. But every star, by its light, produces heat and tenuity, or humidity, in the subject matter, so that you may consider and understand that cold and dry in the actions of the stars are not qualities contrary to hot and dry, but names of the measure of hot and humid. For example, the Sun, with its abundant, dense, and clear light, significantly heats the air. If it mixes its light strongly with the light of the Moon, the air will no longer seem to us to grow warmer, but rather colder, just as hot water strongly mixed with lukewarm water reduces the intensity of heat. From these things, you can understand that it is not contrary to nature for cold to arise from little heat. But humidity comes from much humid or from a humid quality. And finally, dryness is derived from little humid in the substance or from a dry quality. From what has been said, it can be understood how the substance of the stars, by the cognate temperament of the signs in which they remain longer, is strengthened, diluted by a contrary crasis; and how the same stars in the angles of the world, which they constantly change due to the rapid conversion of the world, can intensify or remit not the substance, but only some quality. Hence it follows that one and the same star, at one and the same time, can be said to be humid and dry with respect to different aspects. Cardano gives such an example of this. Taurus is a very temperate sign, having much hot and humid, because it is a vernal and middle sign: yet a planet existing in it will be called dry, if it is found in the eastern part of the sky, but dry according to quality, that is, one born under such a planet, although it may have much natural heat and vital humidity, which is the same as its substance: yet that humid will be drier and not so pure nor so fervent according to quality, as would be the humid of one born in Taurus setting. On the contrary, one born under a planet in Libra setting has purer and more sincere humid according to quality, yet it will not be so dense or abundant, but, so to speak, watery. And in this way, Ptolemy indicates that the powers of the planets are to be distinguished by the familiarity of the signs and angles, in these words, with which he concludes the chapter on the general constitution of the signs and the nature of the four angles: "The understanding of these things is useful for judging the temperaments in every way. For it is clear that such positions, whether of the signs, or of the Moon, or of the angles, somehow affect the productive power of the stars. And if they are in their proper positions, they have a more unmixed quality and a stronger inherent power, as those that are hot by nature in hot places, and those that are humid in humid places; but in contrary positions, mixed and weaker, as those that are hot in cold places, and those that are humid in dry places, and similarly in others according to analogy, and the quality is mixed with a little mixture." That is, the knowledge of these things is useful for judging.

[Planetary Qualities and Effects]
It is easy to understand that the very efficacy of the stars varies in such constitutions of the four seasons, ages, or angles. And indeed, in constitutions congruent with the quality, they acquire a purer and greater efficacy, as in hot things, those that heat, and in moist things, those that moisten. In alien things, however, they are weakened by the admixture of diversity, as in cold things, those that heat, and in dry things, those that moisten, and similarly in others according to the proportion and mixture of qualities. Furthermore, the author seems to be reciting certain opinions rather than establishing doctrine regarding the ages with the quadrants (οικιώod or familiarity). For while some teach that the entire life of a human is contained in the three prior quadrants, so that the first quadrant signifies the first age, the second the middle, the third the end and last part of life, and finally the fourth signifies fame following life: others, however, accommodate the same period of life, divided into four spaces, to the quadrants in the same order: he seems to mix or insinuate both opinions here. But neither of these opinions agrees with the doctrine of Ptolemy, who, although he states that the entire state of life is contained not only in the complete revolution of the world but also in the revolution of individual planets, nevertheless seems to divide the entire life of a human by the ratio of quarters, neither into thirds nor quadrants, but at least into halves, so that the two eastern quadrants, and these compared both to the Sun and to the ascendant, obtain half of life, and the remaining two western quadrants obtain the remaining half of life. For example, in the Moon, two quarters from the new moon and full moon signify half of life, while the remaining quarters opposite these signify the remaining half of life. Similarly, it must be said of the three superior planets. Venus and Mercury, however, although they never come to opposition with the Sun, nevertheless measure the entire life in one period in a small circle, which he calls an epicycle. For their conjunction with the Sun, which occurs while the planet is retrograde, takes the place of the opposition of the three superior planets. But their true synod with the Sun occurs in the upper part of the epicycle where they are swiftest. Ptolemy wrote in this sense in several places, and in the third Apotelesmatic, immediately at the beginning before the treatise on parents, from the position of the significators in the quadrants.

[House Meanings and Triplicity Lords]
Look at which of them is stronger in essence and place; this one you will rightly make the author of substance and the significator of acquisition. If it is in the midheaven, it will find this from the king; and if it is in the house of faith, or rather trust, it is better. Similarly, the first lord of the triplicity gives substance at the beginning of life, the second in the middle of life, and the third at its end. The third house is of brothers and sisters and relatives and loved ones, of faith and religion, of commands and legacies, of changes and minor journeys: and it signifies the essence of life before death. Alendezgod said: The first lord of the triplicity of the house of brothers signifies older brothers, the second middle ones, the third younger ones, and their dignity and their essence will be according to their places. The fourth house is of fathers, inheritances, the end of things and treasures, and all hidden and secret things, and it signifies the end of the essence of human life. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of the house of fathers signifies fathers, the second cities and lands, the third the ends of things and prisons. The fifth house is of children and affections, legacies and donations: and it signifies what will happen after death, namely praise and blame. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of children signifies children and life, the second affection, the third messengers or envoys. The sixth house is of illnesses and servants, and it signifies the end of life, and whatever will happen before old age. Alendezgod said, the first lord of the triplicity of the house of illnesses signifies illnesses and health, from illnesses and from evils, and deteriorations: the second signifies household slaves and servants: the third signifies what will happen from them, and their usefulness and works: and it is the significator of beasts and cattle, and all quadrupeds, and their strength, also their multitude and scarcity, their manner in his hand or their departure from that hand: also imprisonment and retention. The seventh house is of women, marriages, contentions also and partnerships and opponents. And it signifies the middle of the end of life towards old age. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of the seventh house signifies women, the second contentions, the third mixtures and partnerships. The eighth house is of death, it signifies fear and death and Almauerith, that is, the substances or inheritances of the dead, which the heirs ought to possess after their death: and it signifies the end of the years of life after old age. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of the house of death signifies death, the second precepts and ancient things, the third Almauerith, that is, what is to be inherited from the dead. The ninth house is of peregrinations, journeys, faith and religion, wisdom, philosophy and books, also letters and legacies, narratives or rumors and dreams: and it signifies the beginning of half of life. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of peregrination signifies peregrination and everything that happens to it: the second signifies faith and religion and their health and their manner: the third is the significator of wisdom, dreams and stars and auguries and truth, those who practice them, and falsehood. The tenth house is of the queen, and of works, of exaltation or elevation, also of kingdom and memory and voice, that is, of empire, and of magistracies and mothers, and it signifies half of the years of life. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of the royal house signifies work and exaltation, namely of the seat, elevation and the highest dwelling: the second signifies the voice of empire and boldness in the same: the third signifies its stability and durability. The eleventh house is of trust and praise and fortune, also of friends and ministers and helpers. And it signifies the end of the years of the middle of life. Alendezgod said that the first lord of the triplicity of the house of trust signifies trust: the second friends: the third their usefulness or profits. The twelfth house is of enemies and labor and sadness, envy and whispering, the quality of talents and beasts, and it signifies the end of life, and what happens to mothers in their conception, good or bad. Alendezgod said, the first lord of the triplicity of the house of enemies signifies enemies, the second labors, the third beasts and cattle. These are what the twelve houses signify. We will consider the strengths of the houses or the twelve stations of the sky in three different ways here. First, the places of the sky themselves have greater strength the more amply and purely they are illuminated. For this reason, the tenth house holds the first place, the first the second, the seventh the third, the eleventh the fourth, the ninth the fifth, and there is no doubt about these. The twelfth holds the sixth, because it ascends, the eighth the seventh, the second the eighth, because it is in the morning twilight. For example, in Cologne, where the northern pole is elevated 51 degrees, with the beginning of Aries in the ascendant, the cusp of the second house falls at 24 degrees of Taurus, and beyond two hours, 29 degrees of the same Taurus rises. Since this is the time of morning twilight, it is clear that the part of the second house, which is from 24 degrees of Taurus to 29 degrees of the same Taurus, is contained in the morning twilight. Therefore, stars found in the second house acquire strength both because of the position of the second house in the crepuscular light, and indeed primarily because the second house is in a trine radiation with the tenth house, which, being the ruler of the sky, has the greatest strength. Therefore, Ptolemy also attributes great strength to it, although in his region, due to the very small elevation of the pole, a very small part of it is contained in the morning twilight. The sixth house holds the ninth place, because it is in a trine radiation with the tenth, and everywhere it is enclosed in the evening twilight. All other houses, which are below the earth and from the end of the second to the beginning of the sixth, are contained in light, and for this reason lack strength in themselves. Here, if someone asks why all strength is taken away from the fifth house, since it seems to embrace a part of the twilight no less than the second. To this it must be answered that the fifth house, being unconnected to the tenth, and not associated with any scheme, and that twilight, as it is evening and ending in darkness, is far weaker, and finally the part that is contiguous to the sixth is not the beginning of the fifth, but rather the end, due to such weakness it is rightly neglected. However, since Cardanus says it is placed in light, it has some strength, but not to be considered.

[The First House and Nurturing]
The DIFFERENCE, as the Arabs are accustomed to infer and pronounce concerning the outcome from each house, according to their opinion, signified by the affection and disposition of the triplicity rulers in general. The first house signifies 'anabibes', that is, nourishment, life, and the health of the body, both good and bad. Therefore, to understand, for example, what pertains to education and nourishment, they inquire into the lords of the triplicity of the first house, that is, of the sign that ascended in the nativity. If it was a diurnal nativity, they consider the diurnal triplicity ruler; if a nocturnal nativity, the nocturnal triplicity ruler in the first place, then the next one, and finally the participant. From the position of all of them in the celestial chart, they infer about good or bad nourishment. For if all are found in angular houses and are strong, they declare a robust life and strong nourishment for the first four years. But if some occupy angular or succedent houses, and others have fallen from angular houses, then each triplicity ruler signifies particular thirds of nourishment, taken in proportion to the order of the triplicity rulers. For to the first triplicity ruler is attributed the first third of nourishment, to the second the second, and to the third the third. As in the example of the superior diurnal nativity, in which the primary lord of the triplicity in the western angle indicates the first third of nourishment to be safe. This is followed by Jupiter, and this by Saturn, both in the succedent place, namely the eighth, in the celestial chart of equal houses. Therefore, they also declare the second and third quarters of nourishment to be safe, although weaker. But if all were cadent and afflicted, and the nativity was diurnal, they look to the triplicity rulers of the Sun's place; if nocturnal, to the triplicity rulers of the Moon's place, in the way I have already said concerning the ascendant. And if even here sufficient causes for nourishment do not appear, they resort to the place of the conjunction or opposition immediately preceding the nativity. Finally, they look to Jupiter and Venus, one of which, if found in angular or succedent houses, free from evils and impediments, promises nourishment to the native. To this place belongs the statement of Hermes 72: 'Take what pertains to education from the triplicity rulers of the ascendant; what pertains to life, from the triplicity rulers of the conditioned luminary.'

[Hermes' Dictum on Life and Nurturing]
The dictum has two parts. The first is about finding the time of nourishment, whether it is granted by heaven to the native to be nourished or not nourished. The second is about those things that are sought after the time of nourishment is known, and which pertain to the entire life decreed by the stars. What pertains to nourishment must be sought from the triplicity rulers of the ascendant sign, as I have just said. For since the ascendant is the beginning of our life, the beginning of education is not absurdly referred to the lords of its triplicity. But what pertains to the rest of the entire life, if a longer life is granted to the native, so that you may know, you must similarly contemplate the triplicity rulers of the place of the conditioned luminary. The luminary is called 'aigale' or 'conditioned' that which follows the condition of the time. For just as the Sun is more potent and effective by day, so is the Moon by night. Therefore, if the nativity was diurnal, the triplicity rulers of the Sun's place must be looked at; if nocturnal, the triplicity rulers of the Moon's place. If all of these are fortunate, strong, received, in good places and their dignities, they decree prosperity and riches for the native throughout all the days of his life. For example, in the following example of Albohal's nocturnal nativity, the first triplicity ruler of the Moon's place, traversing the sign of Scorpio, is Mars, the second is Jupiter, the third is Saturn, all in angular houses. Therefore, the native of this constellation was always fortunate and eventually rose to the greatest eminence.

[Nocturnal Nativity and Life Status]
Nocturnal nativity with Scorpio ascending. If one was fortunate, but the others unfortunate, the fortunate one promises substance and riches to the native during the age distributed to him; the unfortunate ones, however, threaten calamity and indigence during the age divided to them. The first triplicity ruler signifies the beginning of life, or rather the first third part of a person's life; the second administers the second; and finally, the third administers the third third of a person's life. As in the following nocturnal nativity, where the Part of Fortune falls in the horoscope at 2 degrees, 30 minutes of Libra, and the positions of the planets are as you see, the status of life is signified by the triplicity rulers of the Moon's place traversing the sign of Cancer, whose first triplicity ruler was Mars, the second Jupiter, both cadent in the sixth and third houses, and thus they threaten a bad state of life for the native. But the Moon, which was the luminary of the time, placed in the midheaven, and moreover the last lord of the triplicity, and of the nature of Venus, decrees beauty and good fortune for the native at the end of life. For when the triplicity rulers of the conditioned luminary are from angular houses...

[Ptolemy vs. Arabs on Horary Astrology]
From these examples, a clear disagreement between Ptolemy and the Arabs is evident regarding three major points. First, in the structure and distribution of the heavens. For the Arabs, dividing the zodiac into twelve equal parts, follow an equal method. On the contrary, Ptolemy divides not the zodiac, but the equinoctial into equal dodecatemoria, and with respect to the zodiac, he creates plainly unequal domiciles, as has been extensively explained above. Secondly, it is clear that the Arabs, for determining the place of the Part of Fortune in diurnal nativities, cast it from the Sun to the Moon, but in nocturnal nativities, they cast it from the distance from the ascendant, contrary to what Ptolemy does. Ptolemy universally prescribes that in both diurnal and nocturnal nativities, the distance from the Sun to the Moon should be taken, and that it should be counted from the ascendant, so that the end of the counting shows the place of the Part of Fortune. In the preceding example, since it is a nocturnal nativity, the place of the Part of Fortune, according to the opinion of the Arabs, is noted at the fifth part of Taurus, while according to Ptolemy's calculation, it falls at the beginning of Aquarius. Thirdly, it appears from a comparison of the precepts that the Arabs derive indications of effects from lighter causes, while Ptolemy derives them from more potent and stronger causes. For example, here, where the danger of nourishment is questioned, Ptolemy considers the principal causes of life, namely the affliction of the luminaries and cardinal points by malefic stars. The Arabs, on the contrary, do not so much consider the luminaries themselves, as the condition of the luminaries and the relationship of the triangulators of the ascendant to the angles. Similarly, we will find that Ptolemy considered only the more potent and stronger causes for all other effects, omitting lighter conjectures. Indeed, he not only omits these idle questions and empty lots, but also often severely criticizes them. From what we have said about the first house, it is easy to judge and understand the author's narration concerning the other houses. For the triangulators of the other houses and their significations are judged no differently than those of the first house. For example, in marriage, which they attribute to the seventh house, the triangulators of the seventh place and Venus are considered; in journeys, however, the triangulators of the ninth house and the place of Mars; and similarly in other matters, other triangulators are considered, as is obvious to anyone in the books of the Arabs.

[Colors of the Twelve Houses]
The twelve houses also signify colors, and these are they: For the ascending or first and seventh houses are white; the second and twelfth are green; the third and eleventh are saffron; the fourth and tenth are red; the fifth and ninth are honey-colored, that is, they have the color of honey; the sixth and eighth are black.

[Joys of the Planets in Houses]
And each planet has a certain power in each of these houses, from the accidental powers, which is called joy. Because Mercury rejoices in the ascendant, the Moon in the third house, Venus also in the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh, Saturn in the twelfth. Here, he also assigns colors to the houses of the sky. Just as Saturn agrees particularly with blackness, Jupiter and Venus with whiteness, Mars with redness, etc., according to their temperament; so also he assigns whiteness to the horizon, and thus consequently always two celestial stations equally distant from the horizon to one color, namely the second and twelfth to green, the third and eleventh to saffron, the fourth and tenth to red, the fifth and ninth to honey-colored, the sixth and eighth to black. They say that knowledge of this is useful for knowing which colors of clothes, horses, and such things will be fortunate or unfortunate for the native. For cusps illuminated by benefics and free from malefics declare fortunate colors, but damaged ones declare unfortunate colors. But Ptolemy never mentions this in his Apotelesmatics. However, what he says, that each of the planets has a certain accidental power in some of the said houses, which is called joy, can be excused by reasons and deduced from Ptolemy's sayings. For first, since Mercury is the significator of the mind, which most strongly affects the mind in the ascendant, it is rightly said to rejoice in the ascendant. Then, since the third house is of short journeys, the Moon, which is itself wandering and unstable, will not absurdly be considered familiar, although for this reason it seems more appropriate to the ninth and especially the seventh: for placed there, it wonderfully incites the native's mind to undertake journeys. The fifth house loves Venus, the second and prolific star, because from this place alone the Arabs primarily infer the number and quality of children. Ptolemy also does not neglect this in this matter, but attributes more important parts to the tenth and eleventh. The sixth place is that it is the place of health and misfortune. The ninth place is attributed to the Sun, because both signify religion. The eleventh house signifies fortune, and is called by Ptolemy agathodaimon or agathopoios daimon: therefore, Jupiter is attributed to it, just as the twelfth, which is unfortunate, and for that reason is called by Ptolemy kakodaimon or kakos daimon.

[Strength of the Angles]
And it is said in the signification of the houses that the angles signify strength and perfection, while those falling from the angles signify weakness and detriment, except that the ninth and third signify an open and revealed matter with fame, while the twelfth and sixth signify concealment and retention and worthlessness of things. But the angles and the lords of the angles signify greatness of honors, value, and fortune, strength and exercise, and prolongation from fall. And their presence in cadent houses is contrary to fortune, that is, disgrace and fall. Concerning the succedent houses of the angles, the house that succeeds the tenth, that is, the eleventh, signifies strength and moderate fortune of friends, and from that part in which there was trust. And that which follows the fourth, that is, the fifth, signifies moderate fortune through gifts and venerations, and the cause of children with veneration, joy, and gladness. But that which succeeds the ascendant, which is the second, similarly signifies moderate fortune from the cause of substance and servants. But that which succeeds the seventh, that is, the eighth, similarly signifies moderate fortune from Almauerith, that is, from substance inherited from the dead and hidden things.

[House Strength and Planetary Power]
This entire chapter can be understood from what was said a little earlier about the strengths of the celestial stations. The angles are the strongest, to which the succedent houses approach most closely in strength. However, the cadent houses signify weakness and detriment, except that, as the author says, the ninth house with the third signifies an open and revealed matter with fame: for they are, as he said a little earlier, the joys of the luminaries. Similarly, the twelfth and sixth are said to signify concealment and worthlessness of things, because they are the joys of the infortunes. Therefore, he makes three states of strength in the houses: the angles are the strongest; the places succeeding the angles have moderate strength; and the cadent places are entirely devoid of strength. Among these primary states, there are infinite intermediate ones, the judgment of which is left to the sagacity of the prudent Astrologer. Some have tried to explain the variety of states in individual houses by this kind of similitude. A planet in the first part of an angle or even another house has its total power, which is like 8. But when it is distant from the cusp by 5 parts, it loses one power; if it is distant by 10 parts, it loses two; if by 15 parts, it loses 3; if by 20, it loses 4; if by 25, it loses 6. Furthermore, the remaining 5 degrees partake of the nature of the following house. For each house consists of 30 parts, namely 5 parts before the beginning of the house, and 25 parts immediately following the cusp, and this, if we follow Ptolemy, is to be understood primarily of the parts of the equinoctial circle, as we said above.

[Signification of Angle Lords]
These are also the significations of the lords of the angles when they are present in the angles. The presence of the lord of the ascendant in the ascendant signifies his fortune through himself and through his acquisition: and they signify the presence.

[Lord of the Tenth House]
Its presence in the tenth house signifies higher offices through the king; when it is in the seventh, through conventions, agents, and wives; its presence in the fourth also signifies fortune through inheritances and the affairs of fathers, and through the production of waters and populations or plantations, that is, buildings, from ancient and radical things. The lord of the tenth house also signifies, through its presence in the same tenth house, fortune either through the king or through a great kingdom and higher offices; and through its presence in the seventh, it signifies a kingdom through victory in contentions arising from the affairs of wives; and through its presence in the fourth, it signifies a kingdom through the friendship of the king's nobles, and through the affairs of tribunes, and through the king's dispensers, and the cultivation of lands, and the building of cities, and through the division of rivers, and the guardianship of cities, and from ancient things; and through its presence in the ascendant, it signifies a kingdom through ingenuity and through the king's proximity to the affairs of the common people. The presence of the lord of the seventh in the seventh signifies fortune through negotiations and conventions; also through nourishment and women, and through agents; its presence in the fourth signifies through conventions of women and through negotiations, and through the affairs of fathers, inheritances, and cultivation of the land; its presence in the ascendant through conventions and negotiations, through the affairs of medicine and astronomy, and through spiritual works, geniuses, and similar things; and its presence in the tenth signifies fortune through conventions, negotiations, and through wives and through the king's affairs. The presence of the lord of the fourth in the fourth signifies fortune from the cultivation of the land and its fruit, through the affairs of fathers, and ancient things; its presence in the ascendant signifies fortune from the cultivation of the land and its fruit through ingenuity and depth of counsel; and its presence in the tenth signifies profit from the cultivation of the land and its fruit through the affairs of the king and magistrates. And its presence in the seventh signifies fortune from the cultivation of the land and its fruits through the affairs of wives, and sisters, and through negotiations. These are what the lords of the angles signify by their presence in their own angles. You will do similarly for the presence of the lords of the other houses, and we have therefore introduced only the lords of the angles, so that they might be an example for the others. In this chapter, the decrees of the lords of the angles, if they are found present in those very angles, are recited in plain and extensive discourse, so that this may teach, as it were by example, that the universal governors or significators of things, as they say, are to be determined not only according to their own nature, but also according to the property of all the celestial stations in which they are found. For greater clarity, let one of the author's examples be repeated. He says that the lord of the fourth, if it is powerful, signifies fortune from agriculture and the other fruits of the earth. Now, if it is further asked by what occasion a native thus born will obtain an abundance of fields and such fortune, he answers that this is to be inferred from the nature of the house in which the said significator, that is, the lord of the fourth house, is found. For if it is found present in the fourth house itself, which is that of fathers, such wealth is signified to accrue from inheritance or another occasion of fathers or ancient things; and if it is in the first house, which contains the native's body and soul, such goods are signified to come through the native's own ingenuity and industry; and if it is found in the tenth, which is that of kings and magistracy or actions, from which men seek a living in common society, the possession of fields is signified by occasion of the king and magistracy; finally, if it is found in the seventh house, which is that of wives and partnerships, it is to be inferred that the native will obtain estates from wives or negotiation, and such occasions as are congruent with the properties of the seventh house. In a similar way, judgment is to be made concerning all other significators.

[How to Find the Dominant Planet]
And when you wish to know the dominant planet of a thing, look at which of the planets has the greatest authority in the house of the thing, and the planet that signifies the nature of that thing, as we will say in the natures of the planets. Therefore, see which of the planets is stronger in the house of the thing, and in its part, from the strengths we have already mentioned, that is, from the number we have already mentioned, when we were discussing the strength and power of the planets. And whoever is stronger than all in the place of the thing, he will be its dominator. For example, if the question is about substance, and you wish to know who is its dominator, and the second house, which signifies substance, is, for example, the fifth degree of the sign of Aries: because the house is Mars', Mars has five strengths in this place; the exaltation is also of the Sun, and it has four strengths there. It is also the Sun's triplicity, and it has three strengths there, so the Sun has seven strengths there. And it is the term of Jupiter, and it has two strengths there. And it is also the face of Mars, and it has one strength there. Therefore, Mars has six strengths there, five from the house, one from the face, the Sun seven, and such a planet is called Almubta, that is, conquering. Therefore, the Sun takes the principality there, because it has seven strengths there, if it itself dominates there in the house of substance. Similarly, you will take Jupiter as a participant there in the place of the part of substance and the part of fortune, which is naturally the significator of substance, you will mix the testimonies of the 15 parts of the planets. And you will do this for all houses, and you will know their dominator. In the present chapter, it teaches the method of finding the dominant planets of things, that is, those having greater power than others in determining the outcome of any matter. Hence, some terms need to be explained. The lord and the host differ, as do the dominator or governor of the place, although the same planet may be found to be simultaneously dominator, lord, and also host. The lord of a sign is called in Greek κυριος, and sometimes also οἰκοδεσπότης, and is he who has his domicile in the same sign. For example, the lord of the sign of Aries is Mars, and the lady of Taurus is Venus, and the lord of Gemini is Mercury, etc. Therefore, if the sign of Aries falls into the rising angle, Mars will be the lord of the first house, Venus of the second, Mercury of the third, Jupiter of the fourth (etc., if Aries is rising, the sign of Taurus will fall into the second place, and Gemini into the third place, and Cancer into the fourth place according to the equal distribution of the sky approved by the Arabs). Firmicus calls the lord of the sign a host, and sometimes also a dominator. In this way, when the host of the interlunium is named, the lord of the place in which the interlunium occurred is understood. A planet is also more properly called the host of another planet and, as it were, the head of the household, when receiving it into its house, it undertakes its care and patronage by right of hospitality. For example, if Mercury is constituted in Taurus, we say that Mercury is the host of Venus, because Taurus is the house of Venus. Similarly, if the Sun is in Aries, then Mars, as the head of the household, receives the patronage of the Sun by right of hospitality in its own house. But the dominator or governor and disposer of the place is called in Arabic Almutes, and in Greek planeta επικρατήτωρ, because in the sign and degree of the sign it obtains epicratesin, that is, dominion and superior prerogatives among other planets. For example, in a diurnal nativity, the 6th part ascends. Venus has five powers there by reason of its domicile.

[Significations of Signs and Planets]
78. Argo is of both natures. Others are terrestrial, and of these, some are called anthropomorphic, which are known; others are irrational. Again, of the irrational, some are quadrupeds, which, as has been said, are divided into wild and domestic; others are reptiles, like serpents and similar creatures; others are venomous, like the Scorpion and serpents; others are mutilated; others are bound; others are otherwise named. CONCERNING THE SIGNIFICATIONS OF THE SIGNS. And each sign has its own signification in those things which it signifies from the creation of the members, the customs of men, and regions, and seeds, and trees, etc. Aries has from the human body the head and face; and from regions, Bebil and Serim, that is, Babylon and Arabia and Falastim and Palestine. Taurus has trees that are planted; and from the human body it has the neck and the throat node; and from regions, Ezetimet and Almech and Sandem and Araterad. Gemini is a generous sign, of good spirit, it has from the human body the shoulders and arms and hands; and from regions, Urgeti and Armenia, Nuthrabigem Etele nimstet, that is, Egypt and Bartha. Cancer has from trees those that are equal in length, and from the human body the chest, heart, stomach, ribs, spleen, and lung; and from regions, Lesser Armenia, and the Eastern region Buthabem and Massem Acin; it has participation in Barach and Atrabicen. Leo has tall trees, that is, long ones, cunning, astute, and much distress and sadness; and it has from the human body the stomach, heart, back, side; from regions, Artitri up to the end of the habitable region. Virgo has whatever is sown from seeds, and is generous, of good spirit. And it has from the human body the belly, namely the internal membrane, that is, the diaphragm and intestines; from regions, arguments and assent, that is, a certain region around Jerusalem, and Alforas, that is, the Euphrates; the island of Spain and Festix or Aseum. Libra has tall trees, and is generous, of good spirit. And it has from the human body the loins and lower belly, navel and groin and genitals, hips and flanks and buttocks; and from regions, the land of the Romans or Greeks, and those adjacent to them up to Africa; it also has Araffe or Azim up to the end of Ethiopia Barthan; it also has Carmen and Fegestem Thebes or Thebil Tabrasten Barah Ambarath. Scorpio has trees of equal length, generous, of good spirit; and it has from the human body the genitals, testicles, bladder, thighs; and from regions, Helehiget, the rural areas of the Arabs, its borders up to Allegem; and it has participation in Alchach. Sagittarius is ingenious, cunning, has from the human body the thighs; and from regions, Ethiopia and Maharahen and Achiut or Acenit or Achichit, which is India. Capricorn is of good life, irascible, cautious and cunning, much sadness; having from the human body the knees; and from regions, Ethiopia, Annaban, Alcon and Alcuth, Mahamen up to the two seas Aetahante Achiut, which is India. Aquarius has from the human body the legs up to the lower ankles, that is, the talus; and from regions, Azenes, that is, blackness, and Althupha and its parts, and the land of Elfices, and part of the land of Egypt, and the Western region of the land of Achiut. Pisces, cunning and cautious, mixed, multi-colored, having from the human body the feet; and from regions, Carabrarem and the Northern region of the land of Jurgem, and participation in the Romans up to Effen, it has the island and Egypt, and Alexandria and the Lycian Sea. All things enclosed beneath the lunar heaven are subject to the superior stars and celestial signs, and they agree with their powers, sympathize, and are moved around more manifestly than can be persuaded by verbose proof. For we note in this lower and sublunar world certain solar bodies, such as gold among metals, hyacinth among stones, heliotrope and lupine among plants, and among these the phoenix, etc., to which the Sun communicates something of its virtue more than to others: Certain lunar things, such as silver, crystal, palm, hyssop, geese, seals, and such things, which are especially nourished and preserved and affected more evidently by the Moon. In the same way, we must think and judge about Saturnine, Jovial, Venereal, Mercurial things, and finally about each celestial sign particularly agreeing. Therefore, just as the author above explained the places of the heaven and the stars, so in this chapter he intends to narrate the sympathy of these same places of the heaven with certain inferior things and those adjacent to the earth, that is, he wants to show which places of the heaven or dodecatemoria, to which regions, provinces, cities, trees, plants, parts of the human body, and such things especially agree and consent, and to which they attribute their power more than to others: all of which are so plainly narrated here that they require no explanation, except that a large part of the places are obscured by barbarous and unknown words. Therefore, I will add from Ptolemy which nations are placed under which signs, to whose brief catalog other places observed by younger authors may be added. These are to be observed because all the significations of the heaven appear more in those places which are subjected to the parts of the heaven decreeing something. Therefore, Aries has Britain, Brachate Gaul, Germany, the Bastarnae, Coele-Syria, Palestine, Idumea, Judea. Taurus has Parthia, central Persia, the Cyclades islands, the island of Cyprus, maritime places of Asia Minor. Gemini has Hyrcania, Armenia, Martiana, Cyrene, Marmarica, lower Egypt. Cancer has the Numidians, Carthaginians, Africans, Bithynia, Phrygia, Colchis. Leo has Italy, Togate Gaul, Sicily, Apulia, the Phoenicians, Chaldeans, Ochiniam. Virgo has Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria, Greece, Achaia, Crete. Libra has Bactra, Casperia, the Seres, Thebaid, Oasis, the Troglodytes. Scorpio has Metagonitida, the Moors, Gaetulians, Syria, Commagene, the Cappadocians. Sagittarius has the Tyrrhenians, Celts, Spain, happy Arabia. Capricorn has India, Arrianen, Gedrosia, Thrace, the Macedonians, Illyricum. Aquarius has the Sauromatae, Oxianen, Sogdianen, Arabia, Azania, central Ethiopia. Pisces has Phazaia, Nazamonitis, Garamantice, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia. This is the sympathy of the twelve signs with the regions. Now we will also describe which parts of the human body the same signs hold, for this is very beneficial for judgments, especially when we want to find the place of health or defect. MEMBERS OF THE SIGNS. Head, neck, shoulders and arms, chest from the collarbone, belly from the breastbone to the lower parts, buttocks, genitals, bladder, hips, knees, legs and shins, feet, thighs. Refer here to the 20th statement of the Centiloquium, by which surgeons are warned not to cut veins or excise tumors when that sign of the heaven passes through to which the member to be cut is attributed. That is, do not strike a member with iron when the Moon holds the sign which rules that member. For the Moon, mistress of humors, is accustomed to fill that member which is subject to the sign through which she passes, more than others, with humors. Therefore, if it is opened with iron at that time, from the excessive influx of humors, putrid ulcers, nerve distensions, and such evils can follow, which both injure the member and make the cure dangerous. From this it is also clear why those wounds which are inflicted when the Moon illuminates the sign which rules the wounded part are healed with more difficulty and scarcely without harm to the member. And these two, namely the sympathy or consent of the parts of the earth and the members of the human body with the places of the heaven, are the main things which we are bound to observe in this chapter. CONCERNING THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE PLANETS IN THE SIGNS ACCORDING TO THE MEMBERS OF MAN. And if indeed the planets signify pain, they have in each sign a member proper to them. Therefore, let us treat of the pains of the planets in the signs. And first let us begin with Aries. Saturn in Aries has the chest, Jupiter the belly, Mars the head, Sun the thighs, Venus the feet, Mercury the legs, Moon the knees. In Taurus, Saturn the belly, Jupiter the back, Mars the neck, Sun the knees, Venus the head, Mercury the feet, Moon the legs. In Gemini, Saturn the belly, Jupiter the genitals.

[Fixed Stars in Virgo, Libra, Scorpio]
The length of the preceding star is 161 degrees, 10 minutes, with a northern latitude of 25 degrees. The length of the following star, in the shape of an ivy leaf, is 169 degrees, 10 minutes, 13 seconds, with a northern latitude of 25 degrees, 30 minutes, 12 seconds. The winged star of Virgo is depicted in the starry globes. The stars that are in the head of Virgo, and one at the extremity of the southern wing, imitate the nature of Mercury and somewhat of Mars. The other bright stars of the same wing, and those in the girdle, follow the nature of Mercury and a little of Venus. The other northern wing is marked by two famous stars. First, there is found in it a bright star of the third magnitude, which our people call Vindemiator, the Greeks call it Protrugetes, and in Chaldean, Almucedie Alaraph. Its longitude is 182 degrees, 50 minutes, 12 seconds. Its northern latitude is 15 degrees, 10 minutes, 13 seconds. Then another star of the same wing, of the first magnitude, which our people call Spica Virginis, the Greeks call it Stachys, and the Chaldeans Alzimon Alazel, has a longitude of 197 degrees, 20 minutes, 13 seconds, that is, it belongs to the 17th degree, 20 minutes, 18 seconds of the dodecatemory of Libra, with a southern latitude of 2 degrees. Its nature is that of Venus and somewhat of Mars. Finally, the stars that are at the ends of the feet and in the hem of the garment have the same effect as Mercury and Mars, and somewhat of Venus. The asterism of the Claws (Libra) is figured by 8 stars, of which two are of the second magnitude, four of the fourth, and two of the fifth. Their nature, described by Ptolemy, is in these words: "Those in the extremities of the claws are disposed similarly to Jupiter and Venus. Those in the middle are like Saturn, and gently like Mercury." In the forehead of Scorpio, there are three bright stars of the third magnitude, of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Saturn. The longitude of the northernmost is 237 degrees, that is, it is in the 27th degree of the dodecatemory of Scorpio, with a northern latitude of 1 degree, 20 minutes, 1 second. The longitude of the middle star is 236 degrees, 20 minutes, 18 seconds, with a southern latitude of 1 degree, 40 minutes, 12 seconds. The longitude of the southernmost is likewise 236 degrees, 20 minutes, 1 second, with a southern latitude of 5 degrees. Three bright stars in the body are of the nature of Mars and somewhat of Jupiter. But the preceding of these is of the third magnitude, and has a longitude of 241 degrees, 20 minutes, 1 second, with a southern latitude of 3 degrees, 45 minutes, 12 seconds. The middle one, bright and reddish, called Cor Scorpii by moderns, and Antares by the Greeks, is of the second magnitude, falling in the 3rd degree, 20 minutes of Sagittarius, with a southern latitude of 4 degrees. The following of the three is of the third magnitude, and has a longitude of 245 degrees, 10 minutes, 1 second, with a southern latitude of 5 degrees, 1 minute. Of those in the vertebrae, most are of the third magnitude, imitating the nature of Saturn and a little of Venus. The one in the first vertebra falls in the 9th degree of Sagittarius, with a southern latitude of 11 degrees. The one in the seventh vertebra and closest to the sting is found in the 19th degree, 40 minutes of Sagittarius, with a southern latitude of 15 degrees. Of the two in the sting, the preceding is of the fourth magnitude, and has a longitude of 257 degrees, with a southern latitude of 13 degrees. The following is of the third magnitude, and has a longitude of 258 degrees, with a southern latitude of 13 degrees. They have the same effect as Mars and Saturn. The so-called nebulous cluster, that is, the nebulous circle around Scorpio, is of the nature of Mars and the Moon, and belongs to the 21st degree, 50 minutes, 12 seconds of Sagittarius, with a southern latitude of 13 degrees. The arrow of Sagittarius is Martian and Lunar. Around the bow and the part of the nerve held by the hand, are stars of Jupiter and Mars. In the face, the nebulous cluster, that is, the double nebula, has the same effect as Mars and the Moon, and belongs to the 3rd degree, 40 minutes, 12 seconds of Capricorn, with a northern latitude of 0 degrees, 45 minutes, 1 second. Those in the band and back follow the nature of Jupiter and a little of Venus. The feet are of Jupiter and Mars. The Terebellum, that is, the four-sided old woman, is like Jupiter, and gently like Mercury. The horns of Capricorn are of the nature of Saturn and a little of Venus. The stars of the mouth are Saturnian, and at the same time partake somewhat of the nature of Mercury. The feet and belly are Martian and a little of Venus. Finally, the tail follows the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. The stars in the shoulders of Aquarius, likewise in the garment and left hand, refer to the nature of Saturn and Mercury. The thighs imitate more Saturn than Jupiter. Those in the flowing water are Saturnian and partly Jovian. The last asterism of the zodiac is formed by two Fish, one southern, the other northern, which are connected by a thread, which some call a line, others a small line, others a ligament. The stars in the head of the southern Fish are of the nature of Jupiter and somewhat of Mercury. Those in the body are Jovian and Mercurial. In the tail and southern thread, they refer to Saturn and a little of Mars. Those in the body and spine of the northern Fish are Martian and somewhat also Venerean. Those in the northern thread imitate the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. Finally, the bright star in the knot has the nature of Saturn and somewhat of Mercury. The asterisms of the remaining signs outside the zodiac follow. And first, the 21st northern figure. The Little Bear or Cynosura, which the Phoenicians observe at sea, because it is closer to the pole and moves less. The star at the end of its tail, because it is closest to the axis, they call the pole: yet it is almost four parts distant from the true vertex of the world. The bright stars of this bear have the quality of Saturn, and somewhat of Venus. The Great Bear or Helice, which the Greeks, because it has more prominent stars, observe at sea. For this reason, in Homer, the Achaeans are called 'helico-eyed'. The stars of this bear resemble Jupiter, and under its tail, the Coma Berenices has the temperament of Jupiter and Venus. Therefore, these stars are as if very moist hair, and portend suffocations from waters or phlegm. Both bears are interwoven with seven principal stars, which they call the Septentriones. The common people and poets call them wagons from the shape of horses and wheels. Homer in Iliad 6: 'the bear, which they also call by the name of wagon'. The bright stars of Draco, which winds around the two bears like a river with a sinuous bend, are of the nature of Saturn, Mars, and Jupiter. Cepheus, the husband of Cassiopeia, which constellation the Babylonians called Ficares, and some among us called 'inflamed' and 'lord of flame', contains stars of Jupiter and Saturn. Bootes, that is, the herdsman, is a constellation that follows Helice or the Great Bear, also called Arctophylax and guardian of the Erimanthian bear. Ovid in Fasti 3: 'Whether it is Arctophylax, or that lazy Bootes.' The stars of the Bear set with difficulty, the Southern stars rise with difficulty, therefore Bootes is often called slow and lazy by the poets because of his long stay. Thus Homer in the Odyssey called him 'the setting Bootes'. Lucan in Pharsalia book 3 called him swift, but that must be referred to the position of the southern parts of the earth, where Bootes does not remain in the upper hemisphere for as long as in northern places: his words are these: 'Then Roman fury moved the distant Oretas and German leaders, whose sky, deflected to the south, does not see the entire bear submerged, yet it shines, and swift Bootes is there for a short night.' The stars of Bootes have the qualities of Saturn and Mercury, except that the reddish and shining star of the first magnitude located between Bootes' feet, which the Chaldeans call Azemer Aramer, and our people Arcturus, that is, the tail of the bear, retains the qualities of Mars and Jupiter. It falls in the 18th degree, 40 minutes of Libra, with a northern latitude of 31 degrees. The Northern Crown of Ariadne, which they say Bacchus placed among the stars, whence it is also called Gnosia: the Chaldeans call it Malfelcare. It contains stars that act like Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter. One, brighter than the others, is called by some Hercules, by others Theseus, by others Thamyris: it is the one.

[Fixed Stars and Planetary Natures]
208. The Hare, with a southern latitude of 53 parts. The rest are Saturnine. IV. Lepus. V. Canis. VI. Procyon. VII. Argo. Canopus. VIII. Hydra. IX. Crater. X. Corvus. XI. Centaurus. XII. Boötes. XIII. Thuribulum. XIV. Corona Australis. XV. Piscis Austrinus. The Hare, under the feet of Orion, has Mercurial stars. Canis Major has all Venusian stars, except for the immense and largest star that shines in its mouth, and Canicula, also accustomed to be called Sirius, which is Jovial and also has a little of Mars. Its longitude is 98 parts, with a southern latitude of 39 parts. This star, rising in the morning, is seen even at midday in a mirror, with water placed against the Sun, and wonderfully increases the Sun's heat. Procyon, the Lesser Dog or Antecanis, is so called because it rises before Sirius. Its bright star is of the first magnitude, of the nature of Mercury and also has a little of Mars, and has a longitude of 109 parts with a southern latitude of 164 parts. The bright stars of Argo, which they also call Jason's ship and Noah's ark, are of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. Furthermore, the star of the first magnitude at the top of Argo's rudder is called Canopus, but it does not rise for us, for it has a southern latitude of 75 parts. The bright stars of Hydra or the Serpent are Saturnine and partly Venusian. Some of the more recent authors have called this constellation magnanimous. Crater, the cup or urn, has Venusian stars and partly Mercurial. Corvus has Martian and Saturnine stars. Centaurus, Chiron, who is also called the beast-bearer. The stars located in the human part of the body have the efficacy of Jupiter and Venus. The splendid stars in the equine part are of the nature of Jupiter and Venus. The beast, or wolf, or monster that the Centaur carries, also named Leopard by some, has bright stars, partaking of the nature of Jupiter and a little of Mars. The Thuribulum, that is, the altar or censer, has Venusian stars, and also a little of Saturnine. The bright stars in the Southern Crown imitate the quality of Jupiter and Venus. This constellation is also called the Raven and Ixion's Wheel. Piscis Austrinus, the marine or great fish, which is said to have been translated to the heavens because it once received Venus in her flight from Typhon, has in its mouth a bright star of the first magnitude, of the nature of Jupiter and Mercury, and its longitude is 327 parts, with a southern latitude of 23 parts. So much for the fixed stars: now the forces of the planets are to be revealed. But first, the hesitation that arises here must be recited and examined. For it may reasonably be doubted whether stars that are said to have mixed qualities of malefics and benefics retain both simultaneously, even if contrary, or whether, one quality being abolished, they follow the other. For example, Basiliscus is said to have the forces of Jupiter and Mars. If, therefore, the Heart of Leo ascends in a nativity, it may be doubted whether it makes people sometimes just, as Jupiter usually does, sometimes unjust, as Mars, or whether it makes them simultaneously just and unjust, and finally, whether it makes them intermediate between just and unjust? The answer does not seem absurd to me if we say that these constellations reflect the qualities of that planet with which they are conjoined, that is, joined by body or aspect. In this matter, he who is found present in the asterism, or who sees it more closely, will always be preferred. But if neither of the cognate planets, but some third foreign planet, is joined to the constellation, the constellation seems to defend the nature of that planet to which it is friendly by aspect, and with which it agrees in nature. So if neither Jupiter nor Venus, but Mars, who abounds in Martian quality because of heat, sees Basiliscus, it will not unreasonably seem to retain only the qualities of Mars, the Jovial nature being suppressed. But Cardano has another opinion, who thinks that the mixed natures of the planets should be retained in the constellations, because Ptolemy also used to mix the forces of the planets, so that similar things are increased by similar things, but from contrary qualities, either both are removed, if they are equal, or the stronger is weakened by the weaker, if qualities of unequal forces are compared. According to this method, the star in the tail of Ursa Major, of the nature of Saturn and Venus, will be very humid, because both of these planets are very humid: but moderate in heat, warmer than the Moon and colder than Venus. In the same way, stars of the nature of Mars and Saturn will be very dry, for both planets are dry. But in heat, as it were, tempered, but they will incline to cold, because the cold of Mars is greater than its heat. They will be angry because of Mars, and tenacious in anger because of Saturn, and fierce and audacious in that anger, and finally, timid because of the Sun when it is fervent. Finally, we must also observe that fixed stars, some of which have receded to the south, and some further to the north from the Ecliptic, do not rise or set in every climate in the same way with the Sun or another part of the Ecliptic. For example, a curved line extended from the vernal intersection to both poles of the world, although in a right sphere, in which both poles touch the horizon, it ascends entirely in one moment, yet for us northerners, it does not all rise at once, but where the northern part has risen, the southern will still lie hidden depressed. Therefore, when the Sun or another star rises in the vernal intersection, that is, in the first part, a fixed star placed in the same line to the south will not rise with it, but some degrees later. On the contrary, a star situated to the north, having risen earlier, will precede the Sun, and will neither rise nor set simultaneously with the Sun. Therefore, lest the positions of the stars deceive you, you must diligently provide for them through a solid sphere, or through the tables of Regiomontanus. In the books of Ephemerides also, tables are arranged for some elevations of the pole for this purpose, which show which more unworthy stars rise, set, and culminate with which parts of the Ecliptic. The text follows concerning the power, authority, and signification of the seven wandering stars. 1. Saturn is masculine, malefic, diurnal. 2. And it is the significator of fathers, if the child's nativity is at night. 3. And it signifies extreme old age if it is occidental: but the beginning of old age if it is oriental. And it signifies the gravity of cold and dryness. 4. And it signifies, that is, in the complexion of bodies, melancholic, its increase and distillation. And perhaps it will sometimes be a cold, humid, ponderous, and fetid complexion, and much eating and true love. 5. And it signifies depth of counsel, and multitude of silence. 6. And from the arts, ancient precious things. Indeed, the two members which you see enclosed in parentheses, if they are joined by translation, the reading will be more orderly and arranged: since in both the quality of the art is noted. Hence it will also follow that the paragraph: And it signifies depth of counsel, etc., will be correctly continued with the paragraph: And if he is fortunate, there will be true love, etc. For in both, the quality of the soul is discussed. If he is fortunate, he signifies the cultivation of fields, the devastation of lands and rivers. On the contrary, however, vile and laborious things, such as rubbings in baths, fullers, and sailors, if he is malefic. And if he is fortunate, he will be spacious and patient in true love, if he is malefic, he will be indiscreet, stable, sad and mournful, prone to evil suspicion, very suspicious, and moving men to whispers. (In addition, if he is the sole significator without the complexion of any other planet, he signifies works of leather or his own. But if Jupiter is conjoined with him, he signifies the work of parchment, in which divine books are written. And if Mars is conjoined with him, he signifies the soles of shoes and their preparations. And if the Sun is conjoined with him, he signifies the work of shoemakers' leathers. And if Venus is conjoined with him, he signifies the work of leathers from which drums and other instruments that we use in games are made. And if Mercury is conjoined with him, he signifies the work of leathers in which testaments and numbers of stipends are written. And if the Moon is conjoined with him, he signifies the preparation of leathers of wild animals and mountain animals, and similar things.) 7. And if he is fortunate, he signifies from the substance ancient durable inheritances, and cultivated land, Almauerith, that is, the substances of the dead. And if he is

[Saturn's Malefic Influences]
If it is malefic, it signifies dirty and bad-tasting waters, old and changeable. And from infirmities, phlegmatic and melancholic diseases, viscous, congealed, and acute, such as leprosy, morphea, gout, cancers, and other similar things. And it signifies distant peregrinations, prisons, chains, labor, slowness, and affliction. And it signifies among sects that which confesses unity, if it is fortunate; and if it is malefic, it signifies the faith of unity, yet with much hesitation or doubt. And Messahala, whom God willed to be exalted, who was an Astrologer clear in the science of judgments, whence he was so called, said that it signifies the Jewish faith, because it is from the most ancient, and because all confess it, and it confesses no other. Just as Saturn, to whom all are joined, and he to none. It also signifies black garments. And some others said that Saturn signifies the inner parts of the ear, the spleen, and the stomach. And it has blackness from colors; and from tastes, astringent and sour; from days, Saturday; finally, from nights, that which precedes Wednesday. And the quantity of its orb is nine degrees. And the years of its fridaria are XI, the greatest are CCCCLXVI, the major LVII, the medium XLIII, and the minor XXX. Its strength in the regions of the circle is in the right of the north. And Messahala said that it signifies among human figures, a man between black and yellow, who when he walks casts his eyes to the ground, heavy, joining his feet in his gait, thin, stooped, having small eyes, and dry skin, veiny, having a sparse beard on his jaws, thick lips, cunning, ingenious, a seducer, a killer. And Dorotheus said: This signifies a man with a very hairy body, with joined eyebrows. And it has from regions Ascine and India, all the land of black people. And from parts, having a part of strength and stability. And it signifies lands or earthly things and inheritances: and those who are in charge of works, and audacity and labor, talents and causes of death: and it has from the parts of the world Achiud and Alchiut, the confines of the guilty, and the lands of black people and their mountains.

[Jupiter's Benefic Influences]
Jupiter, fortunate, masculine, diurnal: it is a significator of substance, and it operates heat and temperate humidity, airy, sanguine, and from ages it signifies youth up to the perfection of age: and from crafts that pertain to the law: such as judging just judgments, and bringing peace among men, and striving for good things. And of substance it signifies abundance, and from businesses those that are done without deception, and it signifies the soul and life, joy and truth, and religion and patience, and every beautiful and precious precept, and the abundance of Venus: and from infirmities that arise from blood by an increase of quantity, which is not superfluous beyond nature, nor from burnt and changeable blood: it is the planet of wisdom and intellect and use. If Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies necromancy and incantations and exorcisms, etc. And if Mars is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of medicine. And if the Sun is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of sects, and prudence in contentions and disputes. And if Venus is conjoined with it, it signifies the composition of sounds and other delightful things. And if Mercury is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of Arithmetic and writing: also Astronomy and Philosophy and Geometry. If the Moon is conjoined with it, it signifies the science of the dispositions of waters and their measure, as well as of lands. And from the quality of the soul it signifies generosity and modesty and justice, and from sects plurality and simulation. Some, however, said that it signifies the liver and stomach, and the left ear and arms and belly: also the lower parts of the chest and intestines: and from colors it has ash color and green, and similar to these: and from tastes it has sweet: and the quantity of its orb is IX degrees. And from days it has Thursday, and from nights the night of Monday: and the years of its fridaria, that is, of its dominion, are XII. And the greatest years are CCCCXXVIII, the major LXXIX, the medium XLV and a half: and the minor XII. And its strength from the regions of the circle is in the west. And Messahala said that among human images it signifies a white man, having redness in his face: having eyes not entirely black, uneven and short ships, bald: having blackness in some teeth, of beautiful stature, good spirit, good manners, beautiful body. And Dorotheus said that it signifies a man having large eyes: and a wide pupil, a curly beard. And it has from regions Alchirath and Babylon and Asen and Persia, and Alaormes and Arcadia. And from parts, having a part of the habit of progress, and it signifies faith and desire for good things: and from works, health, security and participation.

[Mars's Malefic Influences]
Mars, masculine, nocturnal, malefic, operates heat and dryness. And it is a significator of brothers and peregrinations: and it has from ages youth up to the end of youth: and its nature is choleric with a bitter taste. And from crafts it has every fiery craft, and that which is done by iron and fire, such as the striking of swords with hammers. And when Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies the striking of iron: If Jupiter, it signifies the striking of bronze: If the Sun, it signifies the striking of gold coins: If Venus, it signifies the craft of ornaments: If Mercury, the striking of needles: If the Moon, it signifies the striking of spears and books. It also signifies, when it alone takes on the signification, the work of medicine: If no planet is conjoined with it, it signifies diminution, and wounding, and opening, and similar things. And if Saturn is conjoined with it, it signifies the work of medicine and wounds: and if Jupiter, it signifies the work of natures: and if the Sun, it signifies the care of the eyes: if Venus, it signifies the work of ornament, such as cutting hair and beards, and cutting nails: and if Mercury, it signifies the cutting of veins: if the Moon, it signifies the eradication of teeth and the cleaning of ears. And by itself it signifies the injuries of the miserable, the effusion of blood, and oppressions by force, and the cutting off of roads and anger, and the leading of an army, and haste and shamelessness, and peregrination outside the homeland, and the foulness of coitus, and the falling of children, that is, abortions: and middle brothers and sisters, the knowledge and discretion of the care of beasts. And from infirmities, hot and sanguine fevers, and sanguine pustules, alabraha, which is redness of the body with roughness and foulness and consumption of flesh with putrefaction: and headache of half the head, and sacred fire and terror, and horrible thoughts, which disturb men and move and impede and render them empty, and whatever is with inflammation of heat. And from the quality of the soul, namely commotion of the soul and disturbance, if Saturn aspects it, it signifies hatred and greatest envy: and from sects that in which there is war: and unity and swiftness of change from faith, and multitude of hesitation, and change from testament to testament: yet all these will be under unity. Some said that it has from the members the gall, kidneys, and veins, and the flow of semen and the back: and it has from colors redness, and from tastes bitter: and the quantity of its orb is VIII degrees. And from days it has Tuesday, and from nights the night of Saturday: and the years of its fridaria are seven, and its greatest years are CCLXIIII, the major are LXVI, the medium XL and a half: and the minor XV. And its strength in the regions of the circle is in the south. And Messahala said that among human images it signifies a red man, having reddish hair, and a slightly round face dishonoring men, having yellow eyes, of horrible aspect, audacious, sometimes having a mark or spot on his foot. And Dorotheus said that it signifies one having a sharp.

[Mercury's Significations]
of travelers away from home. And it signifies spiritual infirmities of the soul, that is, horrible thoughts, and restlessness of mind, that is, doubts, and other similar things. It also signifies the quality of the mind, and other similar things according to its complexion and conjunction: when it is fortunate, there will be good things according to the kind of fortune that makes it fortunate, and according to the place in which Mercury is fortunate: and when it is evil, there will be iniquities according to the evil that makes it evil, and according to the place in which it was made evil. And it signifies from the sects the worship of unity, and similar things, secretly with hypocrisy and simulation. And some have said that it signifies the thighs, the navel, the comb, the legs, the nerves, and the veins. And from colors it has every mixed and varied color, and alexmenium, which is the color of the wild lily flower: and from tastes, sour. And the quantity of its orb is 7 degrees, and it has from the days the day of Mercury, and from the nights the night of Sunday. Its Fridaria years are 13. Its greater years are 76, its maximum 460, its medium 48, its minor 20. Its strength in the regions of the circle is in the north. And some have said that Mercury from the middle of its retrogradation until the second station signifies childhood: and from the second station until the conjunction of the Sun, youth: and from the conjunction of the Sun until the first station, middle age: and from its first station until the middle of retrogradation, it signifies old age and contrariety: and in its conjunction by direction until the first station, it signifies affection, friendship, imitation of love: and from its second station going to conjunction, it signifies the inquiry of affection and concord: and from its first station going again to retrogradation, it signifies the inquiry of contrariety and dissimulation, slowness, little shame, and occupation and stupor in things: and in the middle of retrogradation, it signifies moderate speed because of the weakness of the intellect: at the second station it signifies stupor, occupation, slowness of intellect, egress: to these, speed, openness of intellects: its conjunction with the Sun by direction, signifies the speed and passion of intellects and their breadth or augmentation. Similarly, it happens to Venus in these places and to the higher planets. And Messahala said: Mercury signifies from the figures of men, a man not very white nor black in color, having a high, long forehead, a long face, a sparse beard on the cheeks, and beautiful eyes, not entirely black, also having long fingers. And from the parts it has the part of negotiation, and it signifies fear and infestation, war and enmities and seductions and contrarieties: it also signifies perfect mastery and subtlety in work and inquiry, and in other things that are done in exact men and contentions. And from the lands it has Adelech, Alcuiden and especially in the south, the lands of the Indians. The Moon is fortunate, feminine, nocturnal, operating with coldness and humidity. And it is the significator of mothers, if the nativity is nocturnal: there is in it a temperate phlegm. And it signifies the infantile age, the beginning of growth. And from its works it has embassies, mandates, works of waters and lands according to the quantity of fortune or misfortune or evil: if it is good, it signifies good, and vice versa. It also signifies principality, if it presides or is dominant over some things pertaining to the king, if it is fortunate from the Sun in a good aspect and in a good place. And from substance it signifies silver, and cultivated land, if it has authority in the fourth. And from faith, religion. And from infirmities, epilepsy, paralysis, falling sickness, facial distortion, dislocation of limbs, commotion, and whatever is similar in coldness and humidity. And the quality of the mind according to its conjunction with the planets. If fortune embraces it, and fortune itself is Venus, it signifies courtesy and kindness, and sweetness of mind, honesty of manners, and swiftness of movement, and divine service: if it is Jupiter, it signifies honesty, caution, and society and kindness and beauty of life: and if it is embraced by evils, if it is Mars, it signifies the study of whispering among men, use in such things: if Saturn, hatred, simulation and envy: if it is the Sun from a praiseworthy aspect, it signifies a royal disposition: if it is Mercury, it signifies rhetoric, that is, eloquence and goodness of tongue and writing. And some have said that it signifies thought, novelty of mind and weakness of sense, and heaviness of tongue, and honest women, nourishment of children, mothers and aunts, preparation of foods. And others have said that it signifies the brain properly and the lung. And from colors it has saffron, and from tastes, salty. And the quantity of its orb is 12 degrees. And it signifies in men the left eye, and in women the right. And from the days it has the day of the Moon, and from the nights the night of Venus. And its Fridaria years are nine: its greater years are 108, its maximum 520, its medium 66 and a half, and according to some 39 and a half: its minor years are 25. And its strength from the regions of the circle is in the right of the west. And Messahala said that it signifies from the figures of men a white man, tinged with redness, with joined eyebrows, benevolent, having eyes not entirely black, a round face, a beautiful stature: and in his face a sign. And from the lands it has Arcoch and Timana and Aldeilam. And some have said that it signifies childhood from the beginning of the month until 7 days, and from 7 days until 14 days youth: and it signifies the age of perfection, that is, middle age, until 21 days and nights: old age until the conjunction, that is, until the end of the month, when it conjoins the sun. And when it is under the Sun's rays, it signifies secrets and hidden things: similarly every planet. And at the beginning of the month when it grows, it signifies everything that is to be done: and in its fullness what is to be destroyed, because it decreases: and at the beginning of the month it and the Sun signify accusers: and at the end of the month the accused: and it signifies at the beginning of the month gain and continence, at the end of the month stipends and dispersions. And it signifies in opposition contrariety, and at the beginning of the change to opposition, that is, when there are 15 degrees between it and the opposition, it signifies the beginning of contrariety and its cause: and when it is separated from the opposition, it signifies the causes of exception from contrariety: and in its exit from under the Sun's rays, it signifies exit from concealment, and similar things: and in its entrance under the rays, it signifies adaptation to concealment: and the hour of division from the Sun, it signifies adaptation of its exit from concealment: and the hour of its exit from under the rays, it signifies appearance and arrival from absence: and while it is in the fourth aspect of the Sun, it signifies diminution of a thing or descent from high to low. Similarly in the second fourth aspect, but in the first fourth aspect it signifies the appearance of things, and gain and increase of continence: and in the second fourth aspect of the Sun, it signifies the opposite of these.

[Planetary Qualities and Ages]
And some have said that the Moon, from conjunction up to the first half of its light, will have a humid nature; from the middle of its light up to its fullness, its nature will be hot; and from its fullness up to the second half of its light, its nature will be dry; and from the second half of its light up to conjunction, its nature will be cold. The other planets, from their rising until their first station, will be of a humid nature and signify childhood; from their first station until opposition to the Sun, their nature will be hot and signify youth; and from this point until their second station, their nature will be dry and signify perfect age; and from their second station until their first occultation, their nature will be cold and signify cold old age. And some have said that the Sun signifies the spirit, that is, the vital soul; the Moon, thought and sensation; Saturn, sorrow and sadness, vileness and evil; Jupiter, wisdom and reason; Mars, anger, fury, and swiftness; Venus, play and joy; Mercury, rationality or dialectical discipline. And because we have spoken in this chapter about the signification of the planets when they embrace another planet, similarly, it must also be considered in other things that the planets signify. The power of the wandering stars is known in four principal ways. First, when their inherent force and primary quality are explored. Second, when the places of the heavens, which they occupy by reason of longitude and latitude, are considered. Third, when we compare them either to their epicycles and deferents, or to the luminaries and to each other. Finally, when they are referred to the position of a particular region. For when they appear in the tenth house in one region, it is possible that they are seen by others in the eleventh, or twelfth, first, second, or another house. Concerning the second and fourth modes, that is, concerning the strength of the planets in the dodecatemoria, and concerning their signification in the cusps, he spoke in part in the first difference; but he pursues the first mode in this second difference, and the third in the third difference. However, we will conveniently divide the first mode into three parts, namely, into sex, quality, and nature. For once these three are rightly understood, the greatest and most necessary part of this second difference will become clear. The Sex of the Planets. In every genus, males are more efficacious than females; therefore, they call the more powerful planets masculine. However, the sex of the planets, as Ptolemy taught, is distinguished in three ways. First, by nature: by which reasoning, those in whom humidity does not overcome heat, as in Saturn and Jupiter, are masculine; while those in whom heat is overcome by humidity, as in Venus and the Moon, are called feminine. But Mercury, as elsewhere, is considered to be of an ambivalent nature here, as it produces equal dryness and humidity. Second, by comparison to the Sun. For oriental planets are called masculine, occidental feminine: that is, a planet that is above the earth when the Sun is rising is masculine; one that is below the earth is feminine. Third, by comparison to the world. For those dwelling in the first or third quadrant are masculine; in the second and fourth, they become feminine. Ptolemy's words concerning masculine and feminine stars are these: "It is fitting that they have given the Moon and Venus as feminine stars, because they have more humidity in their essence; and Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars as masculine. Mercury is common to both sexes, as it is equally productive of dry and humid essence. They say that stars are made masculine and feminine by their positions relative to the Sun; for those that are oriental and preceding are made masculine, while those that are occidental and following are made feminine. And also by their positions relative to the horizon. For those in the positions from the east to the midheaven, and from the west to the opposite midheaven, are made masculine as oriental; while those in the other two quadrants are made feminine as occidental." The Quality of the Planets. Here we understand quality as the nature of the planet congruent with the time, and we call a planet that rejoices by day diurnal, and one that rejoices by night nocturnal. In this matter, it is especially to be observed, as Ptolemy teaches, that the temperaments of the planets are attributed to the time abounding in the same qualities: so that Jupiter and the Sun, because of their temperate mixture, in which heat dominates humidity, are accommodated to diurnal light; thus, the Moon and Venus are attributed to night for no other reason than that they consist of a temperament in which, as in the mixture of night, humidity easily overcomes heat. From the intemperate, however, day is accommodated to Saturn to temper his cold, and night to Mars to temper his dryness; since in a bad mixture, it is always necessary to correct worse qualities with their opposites. Hence it follows that neither Saturn will be too cold, nor Mars excessively dry, if the former happens to rule by day, and the latter by night. Therefore, neither will harm as much as usual. From these, it is clear that there are three diurnal planets, namely, the diurnal luminary with Jupiter and Saturn, both of which are most powerful, and for this reason, one is called a malefic, the other a great benefic. And there are found as many nocturnal planets, namely, the nocturnal luminary with Mars and Venus, of which the former is called a malefic, the latter a lesser benefic. But Mercury, since it accommodates itself to both qualities, is sometimes diurnal, especially in its morning rising, and sometimes nocturnal, and especially in the evening, for then it is colder and less hot. According to this reasoning, therefore, the planets are best disposed: the diurnal ones, if they are above the earth and oriental by day; the nocturnal ones, if they are likewise above the earth and oriental by night. For universally, just as the Sun and Moon, so any other of the stars is more efficacious above the earth than below it, which the Arabs denied, who argued that nocturnal planets are more efficacious below the earth by day, and diurnal planets above the earth by night. But it will perhaps seem absurd to someone also that it is said that the power of diurnal planets is more excited above the earth by day, when it is acknowledged that all stars become more languid in diurnal light, when their power is dissipated and diffused by the presence of the Sun's rays? To this hesitation, Cardan responds, according to Ptolemy's opinion, that all these things refer not so much to the presence of the Sun, but rather to the nature of the time, so that diurnal planets are understood to be best tempered by themselves and by this condition of time during the day, whether they are found above or below the earth, whether they are morning or evening stars. But if they have the Sun present in the meantime, nothing absurd will be admitted if we believe that the Sun's presence does not promote but rather disturbs the constitution and strength of the stars. For example, the star of Jupiter is best tempered by diurnal light. But its efficacy will be even greater, and beyond that condition, if it is carried above the earth, especially if it is oriental and free from the Sun's rays. And conversely, its condition will be disturbed if it lies hidden below the earth, and much more so if it is occidental and enveloped in the Sun's rays. In the same way, the condition of the others is to be considered as being helped or diminished. Finally, it is worthy of observation that planets agreeing in quality or condition of time are called of the same sect, and this especially if they also agree in sex. It remains for us to transcribe Ptolemy's words concerning diurnal and nocturnal: "Similarly," he says, "since of the times, these two most manifest intervals occur, that of day, being more masculine because of the heat and activity in it, and that of night, being more feminine because of the humidity and rest in it: they have accordingly given the Moon and Venus as nocturnal stars, and the Sun and Jupiter as diurnal. Mercury is common to these. And if it is a morning star, it is diurnal; if an evening star, it is nocturnal. We have added, however, that the principle of the two sects is not of a corrupting essence. For it is not according to the same natural causes, but according to the opposite ones. For to those of a good temperament, similar things mixed with it produce greater benefit. But to the corrupting ones, unsuitable things mixed with them greatly weaken and disturb the temperament."

[Planetary Natures and Qualities]
This means: Since there are two evident distinctions of times, namely day and night, and day is more congruent with masculine nature, both because there is greater heat during the day and because of the opportunity for action; and night is more congruent with feminine nature, because of humidity and suitability for rest: Therefore, they appropriately handed down that the nocturnal stars are Mars and Saturn, and the diurnal stars are Jupiter and the Sun. Mercury is of both conditions, diurnal when eastern, and nocturnal when western. Finally, they attributed one of the malefics to each condition, following not the similarity of quality, but diversity. For when similar qualities are familiarly coupled with stars of good temperament, they increase their goodness. But dissimilar qualities mixed with destructive ones restrain the vehemence of their malice. Hence, they joined Saturn, who is cold, to diurnal heat, and Mars, who is dry, to nocturnal humidity. In this way, each, having attained a symmetry of qualities from a contrary constitution, achieves a temperate condition. CONCERNING THE NATURE OF THE PLANETS. In explaining the nature of the planets, two things are especially to be observed. First, the primary qualities, that is, which planets are hot, cold, humid, or dry. Second, how, from the measure of the primary qualities, proceeding from the magnitude of heat, the genera of consonant effects are distributed to individual planets. Pliny and Ptolemy are authorities that the star of Saturn is of a cold and rigid nature: hence it has the power of cooling and slightly drying, and as the author says, it signifies the gravity of cold and dryness, which is sufficiently confirmed by experience, that when placed in a hot sign it diminishes heat, and in a cold sign it increases frost, condenses the air, and fills it with pestilential clouds. Ptolemy's words about its nature are these: 'The quality in the star of Saturn is cooling and somewhat drying. Because it is, as it seems, very far both from the heat of the Sun and from the moist vapors of the earth.' Since stars shine with a double light, namely their own inherent substance, and then the light of the Sun, which is reflected from a polished and solid astral body, both of which are most evident from the illuminations and defects of the Moon: Therefore, Ptolemy's reasons are clear, why he said Saturn cools and somewhat dries. For since Saturn's own substance is more impure and less subtle, and because of its great distance from the Sun it is less illuminated than others by that very subtle, clear, and penetrating light, it can heat very little, and by heating little, it cools. For we prove here the opinion of Cardano, who in his books on subtle matters, and in his commentaries on Ptolemy, written against common astrologers and the entire crowd of Peripatetics, declared that all celestial bodies are hot not only potentially, as Aristotle wished, but also actually. But Saturn's heat, because it is weaker, is suitable only for metals, herbs, trees, and certain animals, such as scorpions. He says that it severely harms human limbs, not indeed by itself or simply, but because its heat is less than what is suitable for the more intense heat that human temperament desires. For just as if you mix lukewarm water with hot, you will produce water less hot than the original hot water: so the small heat of Saturn joined to the more abundant heat of man, teaches to cool. In the same way, we understand that Saturn, and especially when coupled with the Moon in winter, because its heat is weaker than the Moon's heat, becomes a cause of cold. Finally, if it ever happens that Saturn alone dominates without other stars, it will nevertheless increase cold. For air by its nature is not, as is supposed, hot, but very cold, and whatever heat it acquires, it borrows from the stars. For there are only two qualities, namely celestial heat and elemental humidity. Coldness, however, is nothing other than the absence of celestial heat from the elements, just as dryness is the privation of humidity. Therefore, since Saturn heats less than any other star, it is always a cause of cold, whenever it becomes powerful and mixes itself with the actions of others that produce heat. For just as wine diluted with an abundance of watery wine is reduced to a worse form, that is, closer to watery than to airy: so the exuberant force of Saturn, mixed with the less effective forces of others, will produce effects in the air most congruent with its nature, that is, it will heat the air little, which, since by its nature it is rigid with eternal frost and deprived of all heat, therefore, being heated little, will still retain immense cold. From these, the reason is clear why Ptolemy said Saturn's quality is cooling. In this way, we also say that the other stars, both wandering and fixed in the sky, have their heat, but are named hot, cold, or endowed with other qualities because of their effects on man. It remains to show the reason why he said Saturn's quality is somewhat dry. Dry and humid arise from one quality, that is, from celestial heat, but differing both in matter and in quantity. For just as in our fire we note that its subtle spirits penetrating the vessels induce heat into the vapors, but its thick soot, not penetrating but merely adhering to the vessels, heats them: so in the same way, the difference of celestial heat, whether great, small, subtle, or thick, must be considered. If it is very great and subtle, it will most easily penetrate the humid air of the region, and by quickly penetrating the air, it will not dry it, but rather resolve it into watery vapors and moisten it. And conversely, if the heat is thick, it penetrates the air with difficulty, especially if it is small. Therefore, since Saturn's heat is small, as we said, and its substance is more impure and unfit for penetration: it is rightly said to dry slightly. But since Mars's substance is still more impure, it will penetrate less, but will dry more due to the abundance of heat. Finally, the bodies of Jupiter and Venus, the Sun and the Moon, due to the subtlety and multitude of light, heat and moisten, but unequally. For the Sun surpasses all in heat. Hence Jupiter is hotter than Venus, and Venus is hotter than the Moon: and conversely, the Moon easily exceeds Venus, and Venus exceeds Jupiter in humidity. Therefore, Jupiter, or as we should rather recite Ptolemy's words in Greek, 'the star of Jupiter has a temperate productive power, being in the middle of its motion, and that according to the times.'

[Planetary Natures and Influences]
Jupiter's star is of a temperate nature, as it is carried between Saturn, which cools, and Mars, which burns. It both heats and moistens. Because the power of heating prevails due to the underlying spheres, it is productive of fertile spirits. And it could not be otherwise than that Jupiter would be called fertile. For where the warm dominates the moist, there is temperance, fertility, and the best life, which seems to be the reason why the ancients named this star Ziva from living, and Jupiter as if a helping father. From the same source, it can be understood that he is the author of winds. For warmth joined with moisture, with the heat prevailing, as we note in 4, generates spirits; with the moisture prevailing, as in f, vapors. Mars' star both dries and burns, just as it corresponds to its fiery color and its proximity to the Sun, since the solar sphere is subject to it. The Sun's heat is very moist and very subtle. Therefore, by its nature, it heats more languidly, and at least dries according to quality. For Ptolemy says: The Sun is found to have the nature of heat and gradually of dryness. We perceive this much more certainly than in other stars, both because of its magnitude and the evident changes of the seasons: for the closer it approaches our vertical place, the more we experience what we have said. Venus's star, according to Ptolemy's opinion, has the same nature as Jupiter, but conversely. For it gently heats and excellently moistens. But Venus, he says, is the same as Jupiter in its temperate nature, but conversely, it is productive, for it heats gently due to its proximity to the Sun, but it moistens most vehemently, like the Moon, due to the magnitude of its own light, attracting moist exhalation from the surrounding waters of the earth. Pliny, in book 2, chapter 8, wrote that by the nature of this star, all things are generated on earth. For in either of its risings, sprinkling with generative dew, it not only fills the conceptions of the earth but also stimulates all living beings. And in chapter 16 of the same book, he says that Venus's star, wandering 8 parts from the Ecliptic, causes certain animals to be born even in the deserts of the world. When it is seen in the morning before sunrise, it is called Eosphoros and Phosphoros, the morning star, as if announcing and accelerating the light; but when it shines after sunset and prolongs the light and sets after it, it is called Hesperos, that is, the evening star, which word Virgil used in his verse: Hesperus comes, go, Goats, that is, it begins to be seen, it does not rise. For Hesperus is never seen in the east, nor Lucifer in the west. It is also called Vesperugo. Vitruvius, in book 9, says that when Venus's star follows the Sun, appearing after its setting in the sky and shining very brightly, it is called Vesperugo. They call Mercury Silbonta from radiating or flashing. This star has such a versatile nature that it imitates the qualities of the stars with which it is conjoined: as if it is joined with Saturn, it will be dry and malefic; if it agrees with the testimony of familiarity, it will be cold and intemperate. But if it is conjoined with Jupiter or Venus, it will be warm and moist, and therefore temperate and benefic. This seems to have given occasion to poets to teach that he is the messenger and minister of the gods: since he is overcome and changed by the forces of the luminaries and all other planets, and indeed even by the greater fixed stars, and passes into their nature by which he is overcome. This happens for three reasons. The first is that among all stars, he is the smallest, so much so that he is barely perceived by the senses. The second is that among the planets, he is the lightest, and being carried around very quickly, he produces a less effective influx, which easily succumbs to the stronger influx of slower stars. Finally, because the star is endowed with such a nature that it is ready to pass into and be changed into either nature. Ptolemy states that it dries and moistens equally. And it dries indeed because it never departs far from the Sun, that is, more than 28 degrees: but it moistens because it touches the moist sphere of the Moon. But it produces sudden changes in both directions, inflated or excited as if by the speed with which it is carried around. It is also the greatest author of winds, both because it revolves around the Sun, and because in its short circle, which they call epicycle, it shakes the air very quickly, like a whistling rod. These are Ptolemy's words: Mercury is generally found to be equally drying and moistening, but never far from the heat, and moistening because it is placed in the outermost sphere: and it makes quick changes in both directions, as if animated by the swift motion around it. Finally, the Moon vehemently moistens and gently heats, an indication of which is that those sleeping outdoors are filled with foreign moisture. And flesh exposed to the light of the Moon, being moist and warm, but with moisture overcoming heat, immediately putrefies. Hence Ptolemy said that it primarily causes bodies to putrefy, and rightly so: For since putrefaction is prevented either when heat dominates moisture, or when moisture is deficient, or finally when heat is deficient: and when the Moon dominates, none of these can happen: it follows that the Moon, by its excessive moisture and slight heat, is the principal cause of putrefaction. He states that it abounds in moisture because it is closest to the seat of the elements: but it is endowed with slight heat because it shines illuminated by foreign, that is, the Sun's rays. His words are these: The Moon has more power to moisten, obviously because of its proximity, and because of the moist exhalation, and thus it softens and putrefies most of the bodies subject to it. But it also partakes of heating due to the Sun's illumination.

[Differences in Planetary Rulerships]
88. DIFFERENCE. The causes, and whether it is a passion, and both are able to receive the indicated part, and the forms and causes of the nature of the stars or their symptoms. Since the most important parts of man are ruled by Saturn, namely the right ear, bladder, spleen, phlegm, and bones. Jupiter rules touch, lungs, arteries, and semen. Mars rules the left ear, kidneys, veins, and genitals. The Sun rules sight, the brain, heart, nerves, and all right-sided parts. Venus rules smell, the liver, and flesh. Mercury rules speech, intellect, tongue, bile, and the seat. The Moon rules taste, the throat, stomach, intestines, uterus, and all left-sided parts. That is: In this place, so that we may grasp a universal rule, it is necessary to contemplate the two cardinal points of the terminator, of which one is in the ascendant, the other in the descendant: but if the one in the descendant is to be especially considered, and the preceding place, which is not at all connected to the ascendant. Afterwards, it must be observed how the malefic planets aspect these places. For if the malefics are situated in the parts succeeding the said places, either by body or by tetragonal or opposite rays, or if both malefics, or one of them, inflict defects and diseases upon the native. These effects will be most evident when one or both luminaries are situated in the centers, as we have said, so that they are either together or opposite. For then, not only if any of the malefics succeeds, but also if it precedes the luminaries, provided it holds the angle exactly, it can inflict an injury or disease, such as the place of the terminator, the nature of the signs, the nature of the malefic or affected stars themselves, and finally the nature of the stars configured to them, will have indicated. For the parts of any sign surrounding the affected place of the terminator will signify the part of the body that will suffer, and whether the offended part will receive an injury or a disease, or rather both. The natures of the stars, however, reveal the types and causes of these events. For among the most important parts of man, Saturn rules the right ear, bladder, spleen, phlegm, and bones: Jupiter rules touch, lungs, arteries, and semen. Mars has the left ear, kidneys, veins, and genitals: The Sun has sight, the brain, heart, nerves, and all right-sided parts: Venus has smell, the liver, and flesh: Mercury has speech, reason, tongue, bile, and the seat: The Moon has taste, the throat, stomach, intestines, uterus, and all left-sided parts. In this text, Ptolemy perfectly shows us four significant points to be diligently observed. First, he declares the matter or subjects upon which injuries and diseases are usually impressed, namely the seventh house, then the first, then the sixth, which is not conjoined to the horoscope. It is reasonable, and Cardan says it has been observed, that the first and seventh always receive defects, but the sixth receives diseases. Secondly, he describes the efficient causes of such plagues, namely the bodies of the malefics, and their hostile rays. Therefore, when these causes concur with the subject matter, they offend the bodies of natives in many ways: especially if the luminaries are simultaneously afflicted, either by opposition or by square aspect. Thirdly, he teaches that which we are principally discussing in this place, namely that the nature and quality of illnesses must be deduced from four main circumstances. First, from the nature of the terminator or the places of the world, namely the first or seventh house, the sixth or twelfth, for we said a little earlier that these often show diseases, while those show defects or injuries. Then from the double nature of the places in the zodiac, namely from the images of the stars, which they call morphomata, and from the dodecatemoria, which are counted from the vernal intersection. Then from the nature of the malefic or affected stars themselves. Finally, from the nature of the stars configured to them. Moreover, the parts of any sign surrounding the affected places externally declare the parts of the body that will suffer, just as the head and neck, and the remaining signs indicate the remaining parts of the human body according to the superior distribution. By the members signified by the planets, the author understands the humors and internal members, just as they are distributed to each star in Ptolemy's text. Haly believes that Ptolemy means by the parts of the signs the planetary bounds or terms, which are in the eastern horizon or in the center of the seventh house. For example, if the affected part of the horoscope is the term of Jupiter, since it signifies the arteries and lungs, it portends evil for the lungs and arteries. He says these things beautifully, but he is off the mark and does not satisfy Ptolemy's words, which speak not of bounds, but of the natures of the malefic and affected stars. Furthermore, Ptolemy attributes this power of affecting members even to the luminaries, which do not have bounds, but embrace entire signs in place of bounds. From this, it is easily apparent that he wanted planets to signify one thing and the parts and bounds of signs another. Fourthly and finally, from this text we must note which parts of the human body principally correspond to which planets, for knowing this correctly greatly helps in judging future diseases, since that member is vitiated or becomes diseased which is ruled by an afflicted planet in the fate or nativity: just as the right or left eye or both are affected when the luminaries are badly disposed. Thus, diseases of the ears and teeth accompany the affliction of Saturn. And Venus badly placed corrupts the seminal vessels, and for this reason makes people infertile, impotent for Venus, and hectic. Mercury afflicted takes away the use of the tongue and speech, similarly we find the chest or lung vitiated, or the liver, or the spleen, or the heart, or something corrupted from the intestines. Furthermore, in the distribution by which the internal members are divided among the planets, Cardan differs somewhat from Ptolemy, and he thinks that in this matter, reason and experience should be adhered to rather than Ptolemy's authority. To what extent they differ, you can easily estimate from a collation of both distributions, which I will present here as in a table. Saturn has, according to Ptolemy: Right ear, bladder, spleen, phlegm, and bones. According to Cardan: Right ear, bladder, spleen, melancholy, and crude, unnatural phlegm, cartilages. Jupiter has, according to Ptolemy: Touch, lungs, arteries, blood, and semen. According to Cardan: Touch, lungs, liver, and flesh. Mars has, according to Ptolemy: Left ear, kidneys, veins, and genitals. According to Cardan: Left ear and ligaments, kidneys, veins, and genitals, bile, intestines. The Sun has, according to Ptolemy: Sight, brain, heart, nerves, and all right-sided parts. According to Cardan: Right eye and seat, heart, arteries, and blood contained in the arteries, nerves, mind, mind, reason, reason. Venus has, according to Ptolemy: Smell, liver, flesh. According to Cardan: Smell, memory, fingers, taste, semen, seat, spirit. The Moon has, according to Ptolemy: Taste, throat, stomach, intestines, uterus, and all left-sided parts. According to Cardan: Taste, brain, stomach, left eye, uterus, and natural phlegm. And when it is full of light, it signifies much, insipid, and sweet phlegm: and if it is mixed with Saturn, it is acidic: But empty of light, little. Therefore, if Mars is mixed, it easily becomes bitter or salty, for little cause is infected. Here.

[Sun and Moon Qualities]
The rest of them differ in the quality of their generation, such as the Sun and the Moon.

[Differences in Degrees]
It should be noted that most body parts are governed by two or three planets: for example, the brain, in terms of its substance, by the Moon; in terms of its arteries, by the Sun; and finally, in terms of its spirit and faculties, by Mercury. And thus far, we have explained the natural properties of the celestial places, and their sympathy with both celestial and inferior bodies. The following more subtle properties of places, with the exception of antiscia, since they were left aside and scorned by Ptolemy as curious and lacking physical reasons, should also be deservedly suspect to us. CONCERNING MASCULINE AND FEMININE DEGREES OF THE SIGNS. There are also degrees in each sign that are properly called masculine and feminine. For from the beginning of Aries up to the 8th degree, they are said to be masculine; from the 8th to the 9th, feminine; and from the 9th to the 15th, masculine; and from the 15th up to the 22nd, feminine; and from the 22nd up to the end of Aries, masculine. And in this way, we depict the table, so that the work may be made easier, with God's help. Aries: Masculine 8, Feminine 1; Masculine 6, Feminine 7; Masculine 8. Leo: Masculine 5, Feminine 3; Masculine 7, Feminine 8; Masculine 7. Sagittarius: Masculine 3, Feminine 3; Masculine 7, Feminine 12; Masculine 6. Taurus: Feminine 5, Masculine 6; Feminine 8, Masculine 11; Feminine 3. Virgo: Feminine 8, Masculine 11; Feminine 6, Masculine 4; Feminine 12. Capricorn: Masculine 11, Feminine 4; Masculine 10, Feminine 8; Masculine 10. Gemini: Feminine 5, Masculine 11; Feminine 6, Masculine 5; Feminine 7. Libra: Masculine 5, Feminine 10; Masculine 5, Feminine 4; Masculine 3. Aquarius: Masculine 5, Feminine 10; Masculine 6, Feminine 4; Masculine 2. Cancer: Masculine 2, Feminine 6; Masculine 2, Feminine 2; Masculine 11. Scorpio: Masculine 4, Feminine 10; Masculine 3, Feminine 8; Masculine 5. Pisces: Masculine 10, Feminine 10; Masculine 3, Feminine 5; Masculine 1. Ptolemy sought gender not in parts, but in whole signs, according to whose opinion both masculine and feminine signs are diurnal, from which feminine signs continuously follow masculine signs in a series. For example, Aries is masculine, Taurus feminine, Gemini masculine, Cancer feminine, Leo masculine, Virgo feminine, and so on to the end of the zodiac. CONCERNING BRIGHT, DARK, SMOKY, AND EMPTY DEGREES. And in each of these signs, there are degrees that are called bright, and degrees that are called dark, degrees that are called smoky, and degrees that are called empty. For some say that from the beginning of Aries up to the third degree are dark, and from the third to the eighth, bright, and from the eighth to the sixteenth, dark, and from the sixteenth to the twentieth, bright, and from the twentieth up to the twenty-third, empty, and from the twenty-third up to the twenty-ninth, bright, and from the twenty-ninth to the end of Aries, empty: concerning which we will make a table, if God wills. Aries: Dark 1-3, Bright 3-8, Dark 8-16, Bright 16-20, Empty 20-23, Bright 23-29, Empty 29-30. Leo: Dark 1-10, Bright 10-19, Smoky 19-23, Empty 23-24, Bright 24-29, Empty 29-30. Sagittarius: Bright 1-9, Dark 9-12, Bright 12-20, Smoky 20-24, Bright 24-30. Taurus: Dark 1-3, Bright 3-7, Empty 7-12, Bright 12-15, Empty 15-20, Dark 20-28, Empty 28-30. Virgo: Dark 1-7, Bright 7-10, Empty 10-15, Bright 15-22, Empty 22-27, Dark 27-30. Capricorn: Bright 1-3, Empty 3-11, Smoky 11-19, Bright 19-22, Empty 22-25, Dark 25-30. Gemini: Bright 1-4, Dark 4-7, Bright 7-19, Empty 19-21, Bright 21-27, Empty 27-30. Libra: Bright 1-5, Dark 5-10, Bright 10-16, Empty 16-20, Bright 20-25, Empty 25-30. Aquarius: Smoky 1-4, Dark 4-13, Bright 13-22, Empty 22-27, Dark 27-30. Cancer: Bright 1-12, Dark 12-14, Empty 14-18, Dark 18-20, Bright 20-28, Empty 28-30. Scorpio: Dark 1-3, Bright 3-12, Empty 12-18, Smoky 18-20, Bright 20-22, Empty 22-27, Dark 27-30. Pisces: Dark 1-6, Bright 6-12, Empty 12-14, Bright 14-23, Empty 23-25, Dark 25-30. CONCERNING PIT DEGREES. And in the signs, there are certain degrees that are called pits. When a planet is in any of them, it is said to be in a pit, such as the sixth degree of Aries and others, as will be shown in the following table. Aries: 6, 11, 16, 23, 29. Taurus: 5, 12, 24, 25. Gemini: 9, 10, 22, 23, 27. Cancer: 7, 12, 15, 24, 27, 30. Leo: 10, 27. Virgo: 7, 12, 22, 24, 28. Libra: 1, 12, 17, 22, 24, 29. Scorpio: 4, 9, 24, 27, 28. Sagittarius: 2, 12, 17, 26, 30. Capricorn: 5, 12, 17, 23, 26, 30. Aquarius: 2, 6, 13, 15, 22, 23, 28. Pisces: 2, 5, 16, 13, 8. I believe that bright, dark, smoky, empty, putrid, and similar places derive their names from the presence or absence of bright stars: which, since they pass into other places through the motion of the eighth and ninth spheres, it is easy to judge how much importance they can have in judgments, if they are accommodated to such dodecatemoria partitions, and not to the eighth sphere. CONCERNING AZEMENA DEGREES, that is, degrees of bodily debility. And there are certain degrees in the signs that are called azemena degrees, that is, degrees of bodily debility. For azemena is a certain temporary bodily debility, such as deafness, blindness, loss of a limb, and other such things, which a person will always have as long as they live, unless miraculously healed. Therefore, when the Moon is in these degrees in the nativity of a child, the aforementioned azemena will happen to them according to the signification of the place and aspects or places of the planets. Azemena is also signified by the stars in various ways, as you will find in books of nativities. The azemena degrees are these, which are described in this table. Aries: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Taurus: 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Gemini: 18, 27, 28. Cancer: 19, 29. Leo: 1, 7, 8, 18, 19. Virgo: 10, 20, 27, 28, 29. Libra: 18, 19. The word azemena signifies the same to the Arabs as 'vitium' to the Greeks, that is, a defect or injury and not a disease: for these, according to Ptolemy, are separate. For, he says, a defect is inflicted once and corrupts a limb once, and does not subsequently bring an intensification of suffering, such as blindness, deafness, lameness, and such things, which, once inflicted, cause pain initially, but never afterwards. A disease, however, brings either continuous or reciprocal suffering to the body: for there are two kinds of diseases, of which reciprocal ones are those that both depart and return at intervals, such as asthma, epilepsy, gout: non-reciprocal ones, such as pleurisy, dysentery, strangury, and similar ones, all of which are of such a nature that they can be separated from the body, and while present, continuously torment the body. On the contrary, defects are inseparable and do not afflict after the initial onset. Such things are said to be affected here when the azemena part falls into the ascendant cardine, especially if the Moon is conjoined to it or to the lord of the horoscoping sign, and indeed in that limb of the native which is subject to the same sign. Likewise, if in someone's nativity, Saturn is found in an azemena degree, there will be a defect in the right eye; if the Moon, in the left. But I advise consulting and listening to Ptolemy concerning the causes that produce defects and diseases. CONCERNING DEGREES THAT INCREASE FORTUNE. And in this circle, there are certain degrees that are said to increase fortune, which are described in this table. Aries: 19. Taurus: 3, 15. Gemini: 6. Cancer: 1, 3. Leo: 2, 3, 7. Virgo: 5, 14, 20. Libra: 7, 18, 20. Scorpio: 3, 20. Sagittarius: 4, 15. Capricorn: 12, 13, 19. Aquarius: 7, 14, 16, 17, 20. Pisces: 13, 20. Hali says that the degrees that increase fortune are those in which fortune and the luminaries are exalted, such as the 19th part of Aries, the 3rd part of Taurus, the 27th part of Pisces, although the author's table has the 20th part of Pisces: and those in which the bounds of both benefics are joined: such as the 13th part of Sagittarius, and the 13th part of Pisces: and those that are the terms of fortunes, and finally those with which fixed stars of a benefic nature are connected. But it seems more in line with Ptolemy's doctrine to judge those parts in which the bounds of both benefics are joined, and as it were, mix their natures, to be the most fortunate. Just as the beginning of the seventh part of Aries is the beginning of Venus's term, and the end of Jupiter's term, similarly, to the letter, there are unfortunate parts in which the bounds of both malefics cohere, as is evident in the following descriptions, of which the former is derived from Ptolemy's terms, the latter from the Egyptian terms.

[Sun and Moon in Nativity]
Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of its nativity, just like the Sun and Moon.

[Qualities of Nativity]
Each of the remaining qualities of nativity differs, as do the Sun and Moon.

[Planetary Influence on Appearance]
The Western planet will make the color black, with sparse bodies, simple and flat hair, black eyes, small, somewhat thin, and of moderate limb proportion, but with a colder and drier temperament. Similarly, each of the other planets also tempers all these things according to its nature, when they are the rulers of the said places of the Sun. But if several rulers are found together, that which is formed from the mixture of different natures must be prudently gathered here and everywhere. For if they agree harmoniously in signifying, we will simply increase the signified things; if they disagree, then we must consider their strengths. For if they are unequal, judgment must be made according to the nature of the victor and the excess by which it surpasses the contrary significator: but if they are equal, they will mutually cancel each other out and decide nothing. Unless we hold and follow this method of intensification and remission, we will never be able to grasp the true strengths and true effects of the stars. The same Saturn, he says, signifies depth of counsel, and the rest that follows there. Again, it must be established that Saturn only effects this if he is the principal ruler of the qualities of the places assigned to the soul, that is, of the places. For the power that is proper to the mind and reasoning depends on the place of Mercury; but morals and lower powers depend on the place of the Moon. Just as the motions of the soul are varied and manifold, so they are not apprehended by one simple consideration, but by many and varied conjectures derived from the difference of the signs containing the places and their rulers, and from the configurations of the rulers themselves, both to the ascendant and to the centers: which could not be conveniently treated in this place, but are copiously and diligently described by Ptolemy in the third book, chapter on the quality of the soul. He calls 'magisterium' actions, that is, actions, study, craft or exercise, by the profession of which men are accustomed to lead their lives and acquire reputation. In this question, we first consider whether the native will have any 'magisterium', or whether he will live idly without a profession. Contemplating the planet, and he who, casting off the Sun's rays, rises nearest before the Sun, and he who occupies the midheaven, and if both happen to one planet, so that the preceding Sun first casts off its rays, and holds the midheaven, he alone will be the master of actions and arts, and especially if he has also applied himself to the Moon: similarly, when neither has both, one must be content with him who has either, that is, who has either first cast off the Sun's rays, or has stood in the midheaven. But if different planets have different conditions from these, as if one first casts off the Sun's rays, and the other is either in the midheaven or conjoined with the Moon, both or all are to be taken into counsel: however, we will give the first parts to him who has obtained more votes, and will rule the place of the midheaven. But if no one suitable for this office is found, neither seen in the morning, nor placed in the midheaven, we must take the lord of the midheaven, so that we may know the 'magisterium' to which the native will be called. For Ptolemy, as it were, despises him who separates from the Moon, and prefers to him the one who holds the place of the culminating planet, that is, the lord of the midheaven. But such, for whom no planet first casts off its rays, nor is placed in the midheaven, are often born inactive, that is, either entirely devoid of exercise, or certainly not treating art remarkably or diligently. In this way, after we have recognized the star suitable for forming the actions and craft of the native, we then immediately inquire what kind of actions these will be. This, however, is not taken, as above, from any planet, but only from the proper power of the three stars, namely, Mercury, Venus, and Mars. For the two superior heavy planets, namely Saturn and Jupiter, are rightly excluded from determining the quality of the craft, since every craft desires dexterity of actions, and abhors the slowness and such delay with which they complete their orbits. The luminaries also recede from such dominion, both because of their nobility and because of their common nature. Therefore, the quality of the craft was to be ascribed to the remaining three planets. And since there are three principal kinds of crafts, Mars, the superior, massive, and crude planet, will suitably preside over the laborious and rough work of farmers and blacksmiths: but for those actions that pertain only to the mind, or are performed with light labor, and have their greatest part deposited in the mind, such as calculations, measurements, meditations, disputes, etc., Mercury agrees because of its smallness, just as Venus agrees with delicate, soft, and voluptuous things because of its sweetness and softness. Therefore, in the explanation of this question, first of all, a general significator of the craft must be chosen from all the wandering stars, in the manner we mentioned a little earlier: then it must be seen with which of the three determining the quality of the actions it is mixed. Any of these three can be both the general significator and the quality at the same time. Whenever this happens, if it is not mixed with others, it will simply excite the native to actions consistent with its nature. But if it is mixed with Saturn or Jupiter, it will indeed indicate a simple craft, but varied according to the nature of the mixing planet. But if it is mixed with any of the three of its family, it will produce a mixed and manifold craft. But if none of these three, but Saturn or Jupiter presides, we will not be able to define the quality of the craft, except from the mixtures of Saturn or Jupiter with the other planets determining the quality of the craft. The modes of crafts, about 19, are described by Ptolemy in book 3, chapter on 'magisterium'. From these, the error of those who think that the general significator of the craft should be chosen from the three determining the quality, and then mixed with Saturn and Jupiter, is first evident, since the principal one, as I said, is chosen from all, and then mixed with the three. Then the error of the author, who attributes a peculiar quality of craft to each planet, and then varied by the mixture of others. If Saturn is the significator of fortunes, which happens if he claims the governance of the places of fortunes, he himself, being strong and fortunate, will bestow, he says, riches through agriculture, the substances of the dead, and inheritances, which is most true, and as Ptolemy says, when he has been reconciled with Jupiter, etc. The author also rightly, like Ptolemy, attributes to Saturn cold, melancholic, crude diseases, and therefore long ones, and those that communicate with the spleen. The words of Ptolemy in book 3, chapter on the vices and diseases of the body, are these: "In general, Saturn causes cold bellies, phlegmatic conditions, defluxions, emaciation, weakness, dysentery, coughing, difficulty in expelling, pains of the large intestine, leprosy: and in women, also uterine conditions." That is, Saturn in general makes bellies cold, phlegmatic, prone to defluxions, emaciated, sickly, dysenteric, coughing, difficult to expel, afflicted with pains of the large intestine, leprous: women besides these suffering from the womb. And in book 4, chapter on finding the quality of death, he says: "And if the star of Saturn has obtained the prefecture of death, it causes deaths after long illnesses and wasting and defluxions of humors, putrid fevers, affections of the spleen, dropsy, colicky passions, pains of the womb, and as many as consist of an abundance of cold." And although in this latter place Ptolemy principally deals with diseases that will kill the native, nevertheless this text can and should be transferred to investigate the quality of other milder diseases, which malefics cause by their presence or hostile rays cast into the first, seventh, and sixth houses.

[Planetary Influence on Conception and Life]
It is to be believed that the forces of the planets are changed by their mixture or combination. For Ptolemy, after he had explained the proper nature of each planet, and what it acquires from its relation to the Sun, concludes this treatise with these words: "It is clear that the stars, when mixed with each other, produce many differences in the surrounding heaven, yet so that the peculiar quality of each star generally dominates, and is in some measure restrained by the position of opposing forces." Concerning the order of the planets or their rulership in the conception of children, and how long they have been in the mother's womb, it is to be known that the first month, that is, from the hour of conception, belongs to Saturn, the second to Jupiter, the third to Mars, the fourth to the Sun, the fifth to Venus, the sixth to Mercury, the seventh to the Moon, the eighth to Saturn: and therefore he who is born in the eighth month does not live, because he is born under the power of Saturn: and the ninth to Jupiter. The rulership or ordering of the planets in human life, that is, how it disposes the life of the native, is divided thus. The Moon begins from the native's entry, that is, from the birth of the child, and disposes according to the quantity of nutritive years, which are four years. Then Mercury after ten, then Venus eight, then the Sun nineteen, then Mars fifteen, then Jupiter twelve, then Saturn until the end of life. Ptolemy states that there are two beginnings of human nature's temporality. One is generation, when the fetus is conceived: the other is birth, when the fetus is brought forth into the light by striving. Both of these provide us with subtle physical causes for the variety of effects in the bodies and souls of those born over time. And the principle of generation makes it so that the seed, once shed, takes on such a crasis as the constitution of the heavens then was, and assimilates the nourishment to its nature, and so attempers itself that the entire temperament which grows from it retains that first state and the quality first impressed. Furthermore, the principle of birth, although it brings many things to the infant that were not present in the mother's womb, such as breathing, being nourished through the mouth, using the senses and other faculties, etc., nevertheless it does not show what will happen to the native from itself, but rather because of the similarity and conformity it has with the first principle, namely, that birth is very similar to generation. For nature emits the fetus with that constitution of the heavens which is very similar to the constitution of generation. But since the principle of conception is for the most part unknown, astrologers therefore use the principle of birth, which Ptolemy also says is very important, and is surpassed by the former only in that through it one can know what happens before birth. For these beginnings do not act as mere signs, but show the causes of subsequent effects. For if any force were to be believed in the preceding nativities, nothing would be more fitting than that they should show us what preceded the exit from the womb in seven or nine months. But in this chapter, the general rulers of both courses, namely that from conception to birth, and that which extends from birth to the very last day of life, are enumerated, and first those are ordered to whom the months, which exist from the point of generation to the birth of the infant, are distributed. For this reason, in the first month, the matter of the fetus coagulates and dries according to the nature of Saturn. Next to Saturn, who is higher than the others, is Jupiter, who presides over the second month, in which, according to his nature, the softening and inflated matter usually causes nausea in pregnant women. In the third month, attributed to Mars, the mass is converted into the nature of blood, and winds and nausea subside. The Sun has the fourth month, in which the principal members are believed to be formed and the soul infused. In the fifth month, assigned to Venus, they say that the form is perfected and the sex is figured. In the sixth Mercurial month, the fetus acquires senses with the tongue and appetites for nourishment. In this month, pregnant women feel the children striving with the impulse of hands and feet to come out of darkness into light, but in vain, because they cannot yet break the membranes due to the weakness of their strength. The seventh month is lunar, in which if the infant, since it has then attained full form and has endured the temperaments of all the planets, comes forth into the light, it will confer the best hope of nourishment. In the eighth month, they say that Saturn, having again assumed command, according to his nature, cools the womb and so weakens the vital spirit that the movements of the infant are scarcely felt. Therefore, if it comes forth so dry and congealed, it will for the most part come forth dead. Since Saturn is such a great and such an enemy of human nature, it is not without reason that poets imagine him to bereave parents of their children. The ninth month, again agreeing with the Jovial temperament, excites winds and gives strong movement to the infant. Therefore, then, for the most part, the bonds being broken, through narrow passages, with the sacrum yielding, it bursts into this world, and if it is born by day, it turns its eyes to the Sun: if by night, to the light of a candle, and admires the unaccustomed light, weeping at the same time either for the torments endured in birth, or foreseeing the calamity of this future life: for as Euripides says, "Life is not truly life, but a misfortune." This is the cohabitation of the months of generation with the crasis of the planets. But concerning the state of the later principle, that is, the ages which begin from infancy and end in extreme old age, nay, even death itself, how and with which planets they agree, it has been amply discussed a little earlier when we were dealing with Saturn. I think only this one thing should be added here, that the said division of times of both principles is general, and common to all men equally, and attributed to the planets for no other reason than because of the convenience of their temperaments. These things being so, just as in the seven ages of life, so in the months of generation, we believe that effects corresponding to the disposition of the stars presiding over those times are vainly to be expected. For the cause that makes these times almost different for each individual must be sought elsewhere, as has been abundantly shown above.

[Hours of Day and Night]
If any day or night belongs to any of the planets, the first hour will be of that planet itself, and the second hour of the other planet that succeeds it, and the succession of the others follows in the same order of the circles. For example, on Friday, to which the day belongs, the first hour is of Venus herself, the second of Mercury, the third of the Moon, the fourth of Saturn, the fifth of Jupiter, the sixth of Mars.

[Planetary Hours and Their Calculation]
The seventh hour is of the Sun, the eighth again of Venus, the ninth of Mercury, the tenth of the Moon, the eleventh of Saturn, the twelfth of Jupiter. Behold, you have the twelve unequal hours of the day. Now concerning the hours of the night: The first hour of the following night is of Mars, to whom the entire night belongs; the second of the Sun, the third of Venus, the fourth of Mercury, the fifth of the Moon, the sixth of Saturn, the seventh of Jupiter, the eighth again of Mars, the ninth of the Sun, the tenth of Venus, the eleventh of Mercury, the twelfth of the Moon. And thus you also have the twelve unequal hours of the night. And so the Sabbath day begins, whose first hour is of Saturn, and to him belongs the entire day. Thus, by counting in order, you will find the hours of the days and nights and their divisions among the individual planets, if God wills. CONCERNING MASCULINE AND FEMININE HOURS. It is also said that hours are masculine and feminine: because the first hour of every day and night is masculine, the second feminine, the third masculine, the fourth feminine, and so they succeed in order, one feminine, the other masculine, until the end of the day and night. Every part compared with its whole becomes better known. Therefore, so that the variety of hours may be more correctly perceived, first of all we will compare them with their wholes, that is, with the days. Nor is there any doubt that hours are parts of days. Now, there are two types of days: natural and artificial. A natural day is the time in which the entire equinoctial circle revolves, and moreover, a particle of the same magnitude as corresponds to the arc of the Ecliptic which the Sun has traversed by its own motion. Since the Sun moves unequally in the Ecliptic, and the parts of the zodiac ascend dissimilarly, it is necessary that there be some inequality in these days, which is explained elsewhere. This day, which consists of light and darkness, and is therefore called νυχθήμερον by the Greeks, is first divided into artificial day and night, then into 24 parts, which we will immediately call equal hours. Artificial days are properly called lights, because they begin with light and again end with the setting Sun. The remaining times, during which the Sun has descended below the horizon and returns to the east, are called nights. Moreover, the inequality of artificial days and nights is also commonly manifest. Just as there are two types of days, so also it must be known that there are two types of hours: namely, equinoctial and temporal. An equinoctial hour is a space of time in which 15 parts of the equinoctial circle ascend, that is, it is approximately one twenty-fourth part of a natural day. For we have just mentioned that a natural day is a little longer than 24 hours. They are also called equal, because they do not vary in summer or winter, day or night. Temporal or unequal hours are the twelfth portions of both the artificial day and night, so called because the diurnal hours are unequal to the nocturnal ones. Astrologers call these erratic hours and planetary hours. The rising of the Sun is the beginning of the first, midday the sixth, the setting of the Sun ends the twelfth. The end of the twelfth diurnal hour is the beginning of the first hour of the night, the imum coeli the sixth, the rising of the Sun ends the twelfth. And therefore, they say that Christians sing at the first hour: 'Iam lucis orto sidere' (Now that the star of light has risen), because the beginning of the hours is taken from the rising of the Sun. Temporal hours vary in three ways. First, by reason of the point of the Ecliptic, by which temporal hours that are longer than equal hours are called hours of Cancer; those shorter than these, of Capricorn; finally, those equal to them are called hours of Libra. Secondly, by reason of regions: For just as in one region the temporal hours of one artificial day or night are not unequal, but only differ from those of different days and nights in the year; so again in one day they differ by reason of different regions, so that a temporal hour of the beginning of Gemini in our region contains one equal hour and 18 scruples. But in Venice, where the pole is elevated 45 degrees, it contains 1 hour and 14 scruples. Thirdly, by reason of night and day, for one diurnal temporal hour of the beginning of Gemini contains, as I said, 1 hour and 18 scruples. But a nocturnal hour contains 42 scruples. For even if in a right sphere the diurnal hours compared to the nocturnal are perpetually equal to each other, nevertheless in an oblique sphere diurnal hours are longer than nocturnal in summer, shorter in winter; and only at the equinox are they equal, which Virgil elegantly taught in one verse: 'Libra diei somnique pares ubi fecerat horas' (When Libra had made the hours of day and sleep equal). For it is known that the Romans used temporal hours, which the ancients attributed to the dominion of the wandering stars. They attributed the first morning hour to the star from which the day takes its name; the second to the next; and so on, observing the order of the planets. For example, on the day of the Moon, the first hour of the day from the rising of the Sun is attributed to the Moon, the second to Saturn, the third to Jupiter, the fourth to Mars, the fifth to the Sun, the sixth to Venus, the seventh to Mercury, the eighth to the Moon, the ninth to Saturn, the tenth to Jupiter, the eleventh to Mars, the twelfth to the Sun. Therefore, the dominion of the first hour of that same night will fall to Jupiter, the second to Mars, the third to the Sun, and so on. The Greeks call the lord of the hour διέπων. Finally, the number of parts and scruples of the equinoctial that ascend in any temporal hour are called τὰ ὡριαῖα μεγέθα, or ὡριαῖοι χρόνοι, that is, horary times. Having defined these, we must now explain how the diurnal and nocturnal arc of the Sun's place or any other star, and their horary times, are found. The diurnal arc in any climate or at any elevation of the pole is shown by the oblique ascension of that half of the zodiac which is from the part of the Sun or another star, or point in the Ecliptic in consequence, up to the part diametrically opposite the Sun. For example, in our time on June 25th, the Sun illuminates 13 degrees of Cancer. Now, to have the diurnal arc of the proposed day, or the ascension of the six signs immediately following the Sun's place, namely the last 17 degrees of Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, and the first 13 degrees of Sagittarius, and this for Cologne, where the northern pole is elevated 51 degrees. First, with the end of the given arc, which is 13 degrees of Cancer, I enter the table of oblique ascensions made for 51 degrees of latitude, and from the table area I write down 315 degrees 30 minutes. Then, with the beginning of the proposed arc, namely with 13 degrees of Gemini, entering the same table, I find in the common angle 72 degrees 44 minutes. Finally, I subtract this beginning from the end, and the oblique ascension of the desired arc remains, 242 degrees 46 minutes, which divided by 12 yields horary times of 20 degrees 13 minutes 50 seconds. These, converted into time, make one equal hour and 20 minutes 13 seconds 55 hundredths of a second. And such is the unequal hour of the proposed day. Now, 15 parts of the equinoctial make one hour, and one equinoctial part makes 4 minutes 12 seconds. Finally, 15 scruples of the first equinoctial make one first scruple of time. Having found the diurnal arc in this way, namely 242 degrees 46 minutes, converted into time, the time of diurnal light of equal hours is elicited as 16 hours 11 minutes 12 seconds. Furthermore, half of the diurnal arc shows the semi-diurnal arc, which if you divide by 6, you will obtain the same horary times. And you will convert the same half into time no differently than was just said about the entire arc. The nocturnal arc and nocturnal horary times are collected from the ascension of the six signs beginning from the part opposite the Sun or another place: just as the nocturnal arc of 13 degrees of Cancer is the last 17 degrees of Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, and the first 13 degrees of Sagittarius. But you will more easily elicit the nocturnal arc if you subtract the diurnal arc from a complete revolution, that is, from 360 degrees. In the proposed example, the diurnal arc of 242 degrees 46 minutes subtracted from 360 degrees leaves a nocturnal arc of 117 degrees 14 minutes, that is, 7 equal hours 49 minutes 13 seconds. The twelfth part of the same arc indicates nocturnal horary times of 9 degrees 47 minutes 1 second 10 hundredths of a second, that is, approximately 39 scruples of time. But having known the diurnal horary times, you will much more easily ascertain the nocturnal horary times if you subtract the times of the diurnal hour from two equal hours, that is, from 30 parts. For a diurnal hour and a nocturnal hour, if they combine, make two equal hours or 30 parts: just as the horary times found a little earlier, 20 degrees 13 minutes 50 seconds, subtracted from 30 degrees, leave nocturnal horary times of 9 degrees 46 minutes 19 seconds 10 hundredths of a second. If anyone understands the use of Regiomontanus' tables, they will reach all these things by an easier and shorter path through the semi-diurnal arcs of the Sun and any star, which are collected as follows: Join the ascensional difference (which is half the difference of the equinoctial days, or the part by which the oblique ascension of a quadrant exceeds or is exceeded by the right ascension) to 90 degrees, if the declination of the star is northern.

[Calculating Diurnal and Nocturnal Arcs]
or subtract it from 90 parts, if the declination is Southern, and the semi-diurnal arc will be formed or remain. Subtracting this from 180 parts will leave the semi-nocturnal arc, and doubling each of these will show the whole arc. For example, in our case, the ascensional difference of 13.69 parts is found to be 31.231 parts, which, when added to 90 parts, produces a semi-diurnal arc of 121.231 parts. Its double, 242.461 parts, gives the whole diurnal arc. Subtracting this semi-arc from 180 parts leaves a semi-nocturnal arc of 58.37 parts, whose double, 117.1412 parts, indicates the whole nocturnal arc. If you divide these arcs, as we advised above, by 15, the number of corresponding equal hours will result. Similarly, if you divide the whole arcs by 12, or their halves by 6, you will obtain the horary times, which, when converted into time, will manifest unequal hours. You will find the same, and more easily, if you convert the ascensional difference into time by dividing by 15, and add the result to six equinoctial hours if the declination is Northern, or subtract it from the same number of six if the declination is Southern. Thus, the arc of semi-diurnal time, or the space of six temporal hours, will result, whose double will count the 12 unequal hours of the whole day. Finally, if you divide the said ascensional difference by 6, and add 15 to the resulting number for a Northern declination, or subtract it from the same 15 if the declination is Southern, you will obtain the equinoctial times that correspond to one unequal diurnal hour. In our assumed example, divide the ascensional difference, which is 31.2312 parts, by 6, and you will get 5.131.5023 parts, which, when joined with 15 parts, will give you 20.131.502 parts, the times corresponding to one unequal hour. From this, it is clear that horary times are most correctly calculated if the sixth part of the ascensional difference is added to 15 parts in a Northern declination, or subtracted from the same 15 parts whenever the declination is Southern. Since not everyone knows how to use Regiomontanus' tables, but many are content with ephemeris calculations, for their sake, we will briefly note a method, descending from tables to ephemerides, by which everything that has been said can be most easily calculated from a single table of the quantity of days. First, to obtain the diurnal and nocturnal arcs and their halves, take the elevation of the pole, or the latitude of your region, at the top of the table of the quantity of days. Then, look for the place of any star on the sides of the same table, descending on the left side, and ascending on the right. For the Proselis, or as it is called, the common angle, will show in hours and minutes the semi-diurnal quantity if the star has traversed a Northern sign, and the semi-nocturnal quantity if it has traversed a Southern sign. Once the semi-diurnal quantity is known, and subtracted from 12 whole hours, the semi-nocturnal quantity remains, and conversely, the semi-nocturnal space subtracted from 12 hours leaves the semi-diurnal arc. The use of this knowledge is also that from the semi-diurnal space, the setting of the Sun, and from the semi-nocturnal space, its rising, are accurately known. The double of each space demonstrates the length of the diurnal light for the semi-diurnal, and the length of the night for the semi-nocturnal. Finally, the diurnal space subtracted from 24 hours leaves the nocturnal space; and vice versa, the nocturnal space subtracted from 24 hours leaves the space of diurnal light. For example, for 13 parts of Cancer, on the right side of the table, the diurnal quantity (for it is a Northern sign) is found in the common angle opposite the polar altitude to be 8 hours and 1 minute, which, when subtracted from 12 hours, leaves 3 hours and 55 minutes, the semi-nocturnal space. Therefore, the space of the entire diurnal light is 16 hours and 10 minutes, and the total space of darkness is 7 hours and 50 minutes, etc. Now, having known the usual time of light or night from the conversion of the diurnal or nocturnal arc, or collected from the table of the quantity of days, you can easily extract the quantity of the unequal hour of the same day or night from the following table in this manner. Look for the whole hours at the top of the table; take the minutes (if any beyond the perfect hours are attached to the diurnal or nocturnal space) on the left side, descending, and the common angle will reveal the calculated space of one unequal hour: diurnal if with the diurnal space, and nocturnal if you have entered with the nocturnal arc. If the minutes of time written on the left side of the table do not correspond to your minutes, consider the difference or excess, and for every minute that you cannot enter into the table, add five seconds to the common angle, so that the true time of the temporal hour comes out. For 12 minutes increase the temporal hour of the day or night by the space of one minute. For example, since the diurnal arc of our example, when converted into usual time, showed us 16 equinoctial hours and almost 11 minutes, look for 16 hours at the top of the table and 0 minutes on the left side, and the common angle will show you 1 hour and 20 minutes. To this, for the remaining 11 minutes, add 55 minutes, and you will get 1 hour, 20 minutes, and 55 seconds, and that is the quantity of the temporal hour in Cologne when the Sun is passing through 13.69 parts. Table of the quantity of temporal hours. Hours, minutes. Hours, minutes. 7 hours, minutes. 00 120 240 360 480 13 hours, minutes. 0 12 24 36 48 8 hours, minutes. 350 360 370 380 390 14 hours, minutes. 1 1 1 1 1 400 410 420 430 440 5 6 7 8 9 9 hours, minutes. 450 460 470 480 490 10 hours, minutes. 500 510 520 530 540 11 hours, minutes. 55 56 57 58 59 15 hours, minutes. 10 11 12 13 14 16 hours, minutes. 15 16 17 18 19 12 hours, minutes. 1 1 1 1 1 17 hours, minutes. 20 21 22 23 24 0 2 3 4 18 12 hours, minutes. 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 The mutual conversion of equal and unequal hours must also be observed. First, if some unequal hours are to be converted into equal hours, resolve the unequal hours into minutes, and divide them by the minutes of one equal hour of the same denomination. For the number of the section will indicate the number of equal hours to which the proposed unequal hours correspond. Conversely, if you wish to convert equal hours into unequal ones, then all the minutes of the equal hours must be divided by the minutes of one unequal hour of the same denomination. For example: if someone was born on the fourth hour, 30 minutes after noon before sunset, and you wish to know which planet presides over the hour of birth, divide the minutes of the given equal hours, 270, by the minutes of one temporal hour, which, for example, are 82. The number of the section will show 3.421 temporal hours, to which add the 6 hours elapsed from sunrise to noon, and you will form 9.241 temporal hours. Therefore, assign the first to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus, the fourth to Mercury, the fifth to Jupiter, the sixth to Saturn, the seventh to the Moon, the eighth to Mars, the ninth to the Sun. The tenth, therefore, incomplete, into which the birth falls, will be ruled by Venus. Another example of a nativity assumed by us, which began in the year 1527, on May 21, which is Tuesday, at 3.471 hours after noon, at which time the Sun occupied almost the ninth part of Gemini, under a latitude of 41 parts. Therefore, the semi-diurnal arc is 7.212 hours. This time, combined with the 3.471 hours elapsed from noon, makes 11.812 equal hours, which, divided by the space of one diurnal temporal hour, which is 1.13302 hours, will yield approximately 9.51 diurnal temporal hours elapsed from sunrise. Assign the first to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus, the fourth to Mercury, the fifth to Jupiter, the sixth to Saturn, the seventh to the Moon, the eighth to Mars, the ninth to the Sun. The tenth, therefore, incomplete, into which the nativity falls, is ruled by Venus. You will also extract the horary times of other planets from the table of the quantity of days as follows. Take from the table of the quantity of days the semi-diurnal or semi-nocturnal arc of the planet in hours and minutes, and multiply it by 2. For the resulting number will show you its horary times, as in the present example, the semi-diurnal arc, which is 7.212 hours, multiplied by 24, produces 18.2212302 parts, which are the diurnal horary times of the Sun's place, because the sign of Gemini is Northern. Another example: I want the horary times of the twenty-fourth part of the sign of Aries. I see under the altitude of the pole 51, for the city of Agrippa, directly opposite the twenty-fourth.

[Calculating Horary Times for Aries]
The difference of the fourth part of Aries is 6 hours and 47 minutes, which I multiply by 24. This results in 15.11718 parts. After the usual resolution and composition, the horary times for the twenty-fourth part of Aries in the said region are 16.571 parts. These are also diurnal, because they are from the ascending signs. If nocturnal horary times are ever needed, and you have found the diurnal times, subtract them from 30, and the nocturnal times will remain, as in the proposed example for the twenty-fourth part of Aries. The diurnal times, which are 16.571 parts, when subtracted from 30 parts, leave 13.31 parts for the nocturnal horary times of the twenty-fourth part of Aries. The reason for this operation is easy to understand. For since one part or 60 equinoctial minutes arises with four minutes of time, if you now multiply 4 minutes of time by the number 6 (for each semi-arc contains that many temporal hours), you will produce 24 minutes of time, that is, a certain semi-diurnal or semi-nocturnal arc, around which 60 equinoctial minutes arise in the space of one temporal hour. Therefore, place 24 in the first place, 60 minutes in the second, and finally the semi-diurnal or semi-nocturnal arc in the third, thus: temporal minutes 24, equinoctial minutes 60, hours 6, minutes 47. Or, reducing the first two numbers to their smallest nomenclature, in this way: 2, 5, 6, 47. Since in practice, we either multiply the second number by the third and divide the product by the first, or divide the second number by the first and multiply the quotient by the third, and by various other methods of operation we arrive at the desired goal, therefore, divide 5 minutes by 2 minutes, and you will get 21 integers (for this is the nature of physical calculation), which, multiplied by 6 whole hours and 47 minutes, produce horary times of 16 parts and 57.12 minutes. From this, it can be understood why in this canon we command to multiply the semi-diurnal or semi-nocturnal arc by 21, so that the sought diurnal or nocturnal horary times emerge. I wanted to explain this more extensively here, because these things are worthy of knowledge and most necessary for understanding the doctrine of the progressions or directions of significators, as they are called, about which more below. A table of the quantity of days for each part of the zodiac follows, calculated. Table of the Sun's setting. Semi-diurnal. Aries. 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. H.m. 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 06 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 26 26 26 26 26 26 26 36 36 36 36 36 36 36 46 36 36 36 36 34 63 63 64 64 64 64 64 64 64 65 65 65 65 65 64 64 65 65 65 65 65 66 66 66 67 67 67 56 65 66 66 67 67 67 67 68 68 68 68 68 68 66 67 67 67 68 68 68 68 69 69 69 69 69 106 106 105 758 68 68 69 69 69 69 69 106 106 116 116 126 125 809 69 6 106 106 116 116 116 124 126 136 136 136 136 96 106 106 116 116 126 126 126 139 136 146 146 156 156 106 116 116 126 126 136 136 146 146 156 156 166 176 176 116 126 136 136 146 146 156 156 166 176 176 176 186 185 126 136 146 146 156 156 166 176 176 186 186 196 206 206 135 146 156 156 166 161 156 186 186 196 206 216 226 226 146 166 166 176 186 186 196 206 206 216 226 226 236 240 156 176 176 186 196 196 206 216 216 226 236 246 256 255 166 186 186 196 206 206 216 226 236 246 246 266 276 285 176 196 206 215 216 226 236 246 256 266 266 276 286 29 186 206 216 226 226 236 246 258 265 276 276 296 306 30 196 216 226 236 236 246 256 266 276 286 276 306 316 136 205 226 236 246 256 266 276 286 296 306 306 326 336 346 256 236 246 256 266 276 286 296 306 316 326 336 346 30 226 246 256 269 276 286 296 306 316 326 336 356 366 38 236 256 266 276 296 306 316 326 336 346 356 366 376 19 246 266 276 286 306 316 326 336 346 356 366 386 396 44 256 276 286 296 316 326 336 346 356 376 386 406 416 43 266 296 306 316 326 336 356 366 376 396 396 416 426 4 276 306 316 326 336 346 366 376 386 406 416 436 446 286 316 326 336 346 356 376 386 396 416 426 446 466 4 296 326 336 346 366 376 386 406 416 436 446 466 476 306 336 346 356 276 386 396 416 426 446 456 476 496 10 Virgo. Semi-diurnal. Sun's setting.

[Third Difference: Planetary Interactions]
THIRD DIFFERENCE IN WHAT HAPPENS TO THE SEVEN PLANETS AMONG THEMSELVES, AND WHAT HAPPENS TO THEM FROM EACH OTHER. And because, with God's grace, we have now completed what pertains to the planets in themselves, and what they signify, we will proceed to narrate what happens to them among themselves, that is, from some towards others.

[Planetary Affections and Appearances]
We have already stated that the power and influence of the wandering stars are primarily observed in their quality, place, position, and finally, in their mutual comparison and comparison to their own orbs. The first three modes were combined in the preceding distinctions. Therefore, in the third distinction, he now addresses the fourth remaining mode, in which the phenomena of the moving stars, which occur to them either due to the diversity of the orbs in which they are carried or from their mutual respect, are to be examined and explored. All such affections are commonly called passions of the planets, but he calls those passions that accompany the planets in their orbs without any respect to others, accidents of the planets in themselves: such as the stations, directions, declinations, latitudes, ascensions, and descensions of the planets, both in their deferents and in their epicycles. However, he calls the appearances, which are understood only from the mutual collation of the planets, accidents of the planets to each other, which again are twofold. First, he compares the planets to the luminaries themselves, and teaches what is the rising of a planet, what is its setting, what is combustion, what is the persona, which they call Almugea, etc. Then, of the combinations that arise from the mutual respect of the planets, although many thousands could be enumerated, the author only recounts the principal ones and those that are observed due to the evidence of their effects: such as conjunction, application, deflux or separation, prohibition from a body or aspect, obsession, solution, kenodromia, peregrination, feralitas, reception and pulsation, translation of light, contrariety or perturbation, abscission, collection, delation of light, refranation, sublimity and veneration, affection and hatred. Signi THIRD DIFFERENCE. The signification of planets in themselves is, for example, when a planet is ascending in the circle of its apogee, lesser in light, magnitude, and speed, that is, when it is between itself and its apogee less than 90 degrees before or behind: if, however, there are 90 equal degrees between it and its apogee, it will be equal in light, magnitude, and speed: but if it is outside these two places, that is, more than 90 degrees, it will be descending from the circle of its apogee, and will appear greater in light, magnitude, and faster in speed. And if its equated portion is less than 180 degrees, it will be increasing in number: if it is more, it will be decreasing in number: and if its equated portion is 180 degrees or 360 degrees, it will neither be increasing nor decreasing: and if the equated equation is added to the mean course, it is said to be increasing the course or number: and if its equation is decreased, it is said to be decreasing the number. And when any of the three higher planets goes more than its mean course, it is said to be increasing its course: and if it goes less, it is said to be decreasing its course: and if it goes just as much, it is said to be equal in course: and when any of the lower planets goes more than the mean course of the Sun, it will be increasing its course: when it goes less, it is said to be decreasing its course: when it goes just as much, it will be equal in course. To be in the course of the luminaries is like being one of the three higher planets. A planet also becomes northern when it has passed its Genzahar, that is, when it has passed through the path of the Sun going from south to north: that transit, that is, that abscission of circles, is called Genzahar. Therefore, when a planet has passed that abscission, and is between the planet and that abscission less than 90 degrees, the planet will be northern ascending: and when it is from 90 to 180 degrees, it will be northern descending: and when it has passed this number, that is, when it has more going to 270 degrees, it will be southern descending: and when it has passed this number going to 360 degrees, it will be southern ascending. This is what it means for planets to be in themselves. Significa- Of the first kind of passions, by which planets are affected by reason of their orbs. First and foremost, it teaches how to find the ascension and descension of a planet, both in the deferent and in the epicycle. Here, some terms conducive to this matter must be explained. A circle having the same center as the world is called homocentric or concentric, such as is represented in the appended delineation by a circle described from center a, with its extremity designated by the letters y. A deferent or eccentric or ablis cuxorge is one whose center is different from the center of the world, yet encompassing it, in which the Sun or the epicycle of another planet is carried around. This is indicated to you by the inner periphery described around the center and designated by the letters. But an epicycle is an orb or a small circle affixed to the deferent, in which the body of the planet revolves, whose image is represented by a small circle, designated by letters, and described around the center. In both of these, two significant points are to be noted, one of which is called the highest apogee, the other the lowest apogee. The highest apogee is the point of the deferent or epicycle most remote from the innermost point of the universe. Ptolemy calls it apogee, commonly by the barbarous word augem, Pontanus calls it apex, culmination, and the summit of the circle. The lowest apogee is the point of the deferent or epicycle that is lowest and closest to the earth, called by Ptolemy perigee, commonly the opposite of apogee. In our delineation, the apogee of the eccentric is indicated by the letter s, in the epicycle by the letter A: The perigee is represented in the eccentric by the letter, and in the epicycle by the letter u. With these things thus, it is clear that the Sun and the epicycles of other planets descend towards the earth in their deferents until they traverse a hemicycle or 180 parts from the perigee of the eccentric, and are carried to the lowest apogee, and conversely, from here ascending, by reason of their deferents, and are elevated from the center of the world for so long until, having completed one circuit, they are carried to the highest apogee, and again proceed to the same turns. The ascent and descent of the stars in the epicycle must be imagined in exactly the same way. For those descending from the apogees of the epicycles to their perigees are said to descend: but they are said to ascend when, having passed the perigees, they reach the apogees. However, the author here understands planets to ascend when they remain in the upper part of the deferent, that is, when they do not differ more than 90 parts from either side of the highest apogee of the eccentric, either forward or backward. For then, due to their greater removal from the center of the world, they appear smaller in light, magnitude, and speed. Conversely, when they traverse the lower halves of the deferents, they accelerate their course and appear larger in body and light, since all things appear larger when perceived by the senses from a smaller, rather than from a larger, interval. That the planets truly revolve in eccentrics and, in comparison to the zodiac, move slower in the higher half than in the lower half, we will explain with the example of the Sun, which is easily understood. No one is unaware that the zodiac is divided into two equal hemicycles by the equinoctial, so that one inclines to the north and the other to the south. Now, it is again known to all that there are more days from the vernal equinox to the autumnal equinox than from the latter to the former. For the Sun, traversing the northern hemicycle, which contains six summer signs, consumes almost 186 days: but traversing the southern hemicycle, which possesses six winter signs, it completes at least almost 178 days. Therefore, since the Sun traverses the southern half almost 7 days faster than the northern half, it is clear that it progresses slower here, but faster there. For if

[Planetary Distance from Earth]
From this, the ascent and descent of the inferior planets in the epicycle are more easily known than from other signs. I think this is because they tend to ascend in the morning rising and seek the lowest point of the epicycle in the evening. The same planets, when conjoined with the Sun, culminate after their morning rising, but after their evening rising, they precisely occupy the lowest apogee of the epicycle. Finally, I thought it worthy of note when planets are plainly closest to the Earth, or furthest from it, both by reason of the deferent and the epicycle. Therefore, when Saturn is conjoined with the Sun, around the end of Sagittarius; Jupiter, around the sixth part of Libra; Mars, around the end of Leo, it recedes furthest from the Earth for both reasons. Conversely, when Saturn traverses the last parts of Gemini; Jupiter the sixth part of Aries; Mars the last parts of Aquarius, if it is opposed to the Sun, it will likewise be closest to the Earth for both reasons. For Saturn, to speak of only one by way of example, first recedes furthest from the Earth in Sagittarius by reason of its eccentric, and then, conjoined with the Sun, occupies the summit of its small circle. Therefore, in such a state, it is clear that it recedes furthest from the Earth. By the same reasoning, you will judge the greatest recession from or approach to the Earth of the inferior planets, if indeed the places of the apsides in the eccentrics, and the times at which they are carried through the highest and lowest parts of the epicycles, are not hidden.

[Inconjunct Signs and Human Relationships]
The sixth, however, defines no exact measure or aliquot part, as they call it, of the zodiac. For example, from the beginning of Gemini to the beginning of Scorpio there are 150 parts, which do not constitute an aliquot part of the whole zodiac, that is, which, when collected a certain number of times, make up 360 parts, of which the whole zodiac is composed. Hence it is clear that all parts of alien signs are plainly inconjunct. This is the cause of inconjunct signs; it remains for us to explain the method of finding them by three rules. FIRST: Fixed signs, namely, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, each have four inconjunct signs: one immediately following, another immediately preceding, and those opposite to both, or those which are found to be sixth before and sixth after the fixed signs. For example, Taurus is disjoined first from Gemini and Aries, which are second from Taurus, and one immediately follows Taurus, and the other immediately precedes it. Then from Sagittarius and Libra, which are opposite to those second signs, and are sixth from Taurus, if we proceed to one by consequent signs and to the other by antecedent signs. SECOND: Mutable signs, namely, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, each have only two inconjunct signs: the succeeding one and the one opposite to that succeeding one, which itself precedes the mutable sign in the sixth place. For example, Aries is disjoined first from Taurus, which is second from it, then from Scorpio, which is opposite to Taurus and sixth before Aries. THIRD: Common or bicorporeal signs, namely, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces, similarly find only two inconjunct signs: namely, the immediately preceding one, which is second from it, and the one opposite to the preceding one, which is distant in the sixth place from the common sign. For example, the sign Gemini has as inconjunct first the sign Taurus, which immediately precedes the sign of Gemini; then the sign Scorpio, which is opposite to Taurus and succeeds Gemini in the sixth place. From these it is manifest that opposite places are disjoined from the same places in number and equality. Aries, for example, and Libra are opposite signs, and for this reason are separated from Taurus and Scorpio. Thus Gemini and Sagittarius, when they are diametrically distant, are equally disjoined from Scorpio and Taurus; and so it can be said of the others, a summary of which we have placed in the following figure. INCONJUNCT SIGNS OF MUTABLE SIGNS: Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn. INCONJUNCT SIGNS OF FIXED SIGNS: Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius. INCONJUNCT SIGNS OF BICORPOREAL SIGNS: Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces. It is most worthy of relation and observation what Cardan wrote about this place, namely, that the ancient wise men, by that fourfold distinction of signs, insinuated to us a fourfold comparison of men. The first is taken from commanding and obedient signs, and it is of those whose one spontaneously renders obedience to the other, because of nativities constituted in commanding and obedient places. This obedience will be most perfect if the significators of such things have received each other not only from the same sign or degree, but also from a minute part of the sky; for then he who has his significator in an obedient place, even if he is a king or a man of other more excellent fortune, will perfectly obey him whose significator has traversed the commanding point of the sky, especially if they are born in the same region, for in this way they will more easily meet through the administration of affairs or through some other occasion. This perfection will diminish somewhat if the said significators are coupled only by degree, for then one will obey the other if they are equal, or certainly if he who ought to obey is of lesser condition in dignity, wealth, sex, or age. But still, and by far, the obedience will be weaker if that connection of significators arises only from the sign: nevertheless, one will obey the other and comply if he who has the significator in the obedient sign is a servant, and the other, having the significator in the commanding sign, is a master. Hence is clear the reason why Aristotle, unlike jurists, did not say that all men are free by nature, but that some are free by nature, and others are servants by nature. Those are free by nature whom no one can command without force, such as exist when no significators occupy the obedient signs. But those are servants by nature whom no one willingly obeys and only under compulsion, and such are generated when the commanding signs comprehend none of the significators. But among these extremes, few are found, but most are found to be of a middle condition, that is, they command some, and spontaneously obey others. Why? Because most have a part of the significators in commanding signs, and a part in obedient signs; very few are found who obtain all significators of one kind. The second comparison of men is taken from those who behold, and it is of those who, although they agree in manners and some affections, are not for that reason, but for another that follows, more prone by nature to mutual concord or discord. For it was said a little earlier that beholding signs are not efficient of love, but of equality of manners. But it can hardly happen that someone has no one agreeing in manners, since all parts of the zodiac, even minute ones, correspond to beholding parts, with the exception of the tropical points of the sun, which, when they occupy significators, behold no place at all. The reason for proximity explained in commanding and obedient signs must also be observed here. The third comparison of men is taken from signs aspecting each other by trine, square, sextile, or opposition, and it is of those who agree in friendship or disagree in malevolence. Indeed, significators placed in trine and sextile figures conduce to friendship, but in opposition or square to enmity. The fourth and last comparison is taken from inconjunct signs, and it is of those who are plainly connected by no bond, but either do not know each other, or if they meet, fall into great enmities. To this place belongs the 33rd enunciation of the Centiloquium: "Love and hatred are taken both from the concord and discord of the luminaries, and from the ascendants of each nativity; but the obedient signs increase benevolence." By this rule, we are commanded to judge the friendships and enmities of the native not only from his own genesis, but from his concurrence with the nativities of others. And it rightly says that the natural concord and benevolence between two people is caused by the agreement of the principal places, that is, of the luminaries and horoscopes in each nativity. This agreement occurs in four principal ways. First, if the luminaries in both nativities hold the same signs: Then if they behold each other with a favorable light: Third, if they have exchanged places: Finally, if the signs in which they are situated are obedient. For example, if in both nativities, namely of Paul and Peter, the Sun has occupied the sign Sagittarius, we will pronounce that there will be mutual familiarity and friendship between Paul and Peter because of the Sun's presence in one sign in both nativities. The same is also determined by the concurrence of the Moon's places, which, if it is partile, signifies that friendship to be most close and perfect; if not, then according to Ptolemy's proportion of the distance of the solar or lunar places, the bond of benevolence is attenuated, until, by a longer departure of 17 parts, the signification of benevolence vanishes into nothing. But if the places of the luminaries are not in one but in different signs, yet beholding each other with a favorable light, they will similarly reconcile friendship. As if, when Paul is born, the Sun occupies the sign Sagittarius, but in Peter's nativity the same Sun passes through the sign Libra, from which places the Sun's places, connected by trine radiation, generate mutual love between the natives. In the same way, but with less benevolence, sextile places determine, and also antiscia, provided they are not hateful; for these, as I said above, ...

[Planetary Anomaly and Motion]
The meaning is: If the equated anomaly of the orb, or its equated argument, as they call it, of which we spoke a little earlier, is less than 180 parts, then the planet is said to be προθετικός (prothetikos), that is, augmented in number, because then the prosthaphaeresis, that is, the equation of the argument, is added to the mean motion of the planet, that is, to the true motion of the center of the epicycle, so that its true motion may result. If the same equated anomaly of the orb has more than 180 parts, it is called ἀφαιρετικός (aphairesis) of the number, that is, diminished in number, because then the prosthaphaeresis is subtracted from the true motion of the epicycle, so that the excess makes known to us the true place of the planet. For example, above in the calculation of Saturn, the equated anomaly of the orb was found to be 45 parts, 33 minutes, 13 seconds, 2223 thirds, which is much less than a semicircle. Therefore, with Saturn being προθετικός (prothetikos) in number, we added its equated prosthaphaeresis, which is 4 parts, 13 minutes, 1 second, 55 seconds, 2 thirds, to the true motion of the epicycle, which is 3550 parts, 61 minutes, 5 seconds, 2 thirds, to produce the true place of Saturn from the head of sidereal Aries, namely 359 parts, 20 minutes, 12 seconds. To this number, adding the true precession of the equinoxes, we produced the true place of Saturn from the apparent equinox, 26 parts, 42 minutes, 1 second, 20 seconds, 2 thirds. In the same way, if you look at the calculation of Venus and Mercury, you will find them augmented in number. But in the calculation of Mars and Jupiter, since the equated anomaly exceeds 180 parts, you will be able to pronounce both of these planets diminished in number. But if the equated anomaly is exactly 180 or 360 parts, then, since the lines of the true motion of the planet and the true motion of the center of the epicycle unite, it is said to be neither augmented nor diminished, but equal in number. This is described more fully and clearly in the theories of the planets.

[Planetary Velocity and Stations]
Regarding the velocity and slowness of the planets' motion, to which we must add progressions, or as they call them, directions, retrogradations, and stations, and any other affections of the five wandering stars due to the sections that occur to them by reason of their eccentrics and epicycles: a planet is said to be swift in motion when, in the consequence of the signs, its true motion is greater than its mean motion. But it is said to be slow in motion when it retrogrades, or at least moves more slowly than if its mean motion were proceeding. You will judge these affections of the stars most easily if you extract the diurnal motion of the planet from an ephemeris and compare it with its mean motion described here in tables, which must be diligently done in examining the forces of the stars' diurnal motions. For when stars have shone in their morning rising and their true motion has been greater than their mean motion, they are judged by Ptolemy to be most robust. Here it should also be observed that in the three superior planets, the swiftness of motion does not have as much effect as in the three inferior planets. Therefore, in Venus, the swiftness of motion is to be considered and has much effect, more in Mercury, and most in the Moon. Furthermore, a planet is progressive or direct, as they call it, when it moves through the upper arc of the epicycle intercepted between the station points, and when its motion written in the ephemeris increases, from which it also received its name, so that being thus affected, and leaving the preceding parts, it invades the succeeding ones, and is called πολικός (polikos). There is, however, a clear difference between the swiftness of course and direction. For every planet swift in course is at the same time direct, but not every planet that is direct is necessarily swift in course; indeed, around the beginnings of directions, the mean motion usually surpasses the true motion in swiftness. A planet becomes retrograde or retrograding when it moves through the lower apogee of the small circle, and its motion written in the ephemeris decreases, and again it finds a name, so that in this way, leaving the succeeding places of the sign and returning to the preceding signs, it is called ἀποκγαιικός (apokgaikos).

[Planetary Stations and Anomaly]
It is called stationary when, falling into the station points, it seems to stand armed as if in a cage, and to inhibit its course. You will recognize this whenever you observe no variation in parts and scruples in the ephemerides. In addition, the syllables DI and RE inserted in the columns of the ephemerides for the five planets indicate the beginnings of directions and retrogressions. But also two stations are observed, namely the first and the second. The first station, like the ωριγμός (horismos), is the point of the epicycle from which the planet, descending, begins to retrograde. The second station, the δεύτερο ωριγμός (deutero horismos), is the other point of the epicycle into which the planet, falling from retrogradation, begins to become direct. We will also be able to calculate all these affections of the planets, of which we have just spoken, very easily, if, by entering the canon of planetary stations through the equated anomaly of the eccentric, we appropriately extract the numbers of both the first and second stations, and then immediately compare them to the equated anomaly of commutation. For if we find the number of the equated anomaly of commutation equal to the number of the first station, we will also pronounce the planet to be lingering at the point of the first station, from which it descends through retrogradation to the perigee of the epicycle. But if the same number of πραλλάξεως (parallax) is equal to the number of the second station, we will similarly say that the planet is stationary at the other point of the epicycle, from which it ascends through direct motion to its highest point. Finally, if the anomaly of commutation is unequal to the number of either station, the planet will indicate either ὑπολλῆι κόμ (hypolleikom) or προκγατικόμ (prokgaikom): and ὑπολλῆι κόμ (hypolleikom) indeed, when the number of the anomaly of commutation is less than the number of the first station, or greater than the number of the second station: but προκγατικόμ (prokgaikom), when the same anomaly is greater than the number of the first station, and less than the number of the second station. At the time of our example in calculation 1, the equated anomaly of commutation is seen to be 45 parts, 33 minutes, 1 second: and the equated anomaly of the eccentric is 114 parts, 32 minutes, 19 seconds, to which in the canon of stations under the title 'h', corresponds the number of the first station 114 parts, 30 minutes, 14 seconds, and of the second station 245 parts, 30 minutes, 1 second. Since the number of the anomaly of commutation does not agree with either of these numbers, and is much less than the number of the first station, therefore Saturn at this time is outside the limits of the stations.

[Planetary Motion and Latitude]
The second type of planetary affections follows, which includes the affections of the stars that they acquire from their relation to the equinoctial and ecliptic of the Sun. The declination of the stars is nothing other than their distance from the equinoctial circle towards the north or south. And latitude is nothing other than the departure from the middle of the zodiac; which is similarly twofold, namely southern and northern. Declination is calculated by a line drawn through the poles of the world and the true place of the star. Latitude, however, is calculated by a line drawn through the cardinal points of the zodiac and the true place of the star. It is clear, however, that although the Sun has declination, it never acquires any latitude, because the plane of its deferent always remains in the plane of the ecliptic. For the other planets, whose apsides or deferents intersect the plane of the ecliptic at the center of the world, and whose deferents depart from the same at certain limits, the latitude is manifest, but so involved with the deviations of the apsides and the inclinations and deflections of the epicycles, that it can hardly be explained briefly without obscurity. There is, however, this law for the three superior planets, that just as the Moon, so their individual apsides recede from the Ecliptic at a certain interval, and are intersected by it at the center of the universe, so that those hemicycles of the apsides which sustain the apogees, are removed to the northern part of the world, and the remaining ones which contain the perigees, to the south, at a certain and minimally variable distance: in Saturn indeed almost two and a half parts; in Jupiter almost one and a half parts; and in Mars finally one part. But the nodes of the Moon differ from the intersections of these apsides with the ecliptic in this, that there they move daily by three scruples into preceding signs, but here into consequent signs no faster than the apogees are transferred by the motion of the eighth sphere, as they call it, so that the apogees describe equally distant peripheries of the ecliptic in the north, and the perigees in the south, and never approach the nodes of their apsides as in the Moon. All intersections, conjunctions, or nodes, or syzygies of all apsides with the ecliptic are called extended, but Ptolemy in the third book of the Almagest appears to have specifically named the conjunction of the Moon a syzygy, and the other planets' nodes as kampia. Furthermore, since this latitude of the apsides differs from experience, therefore, in order to satisfy the phenomena, another ratio of latitudes is added to it, derived from the inclination of the epicycles to their apsides, and it is such: When the center of the epicycle occupies either of the nodes, then the plane of the small circle is entirely along the ecliptic circle, and the culminating point and the opposite point fall on the intersection of the deferent and the ecliptic. But when the center of the epicycle is at the nodes, the perigee of the small circle declines from the node, that is, it faces that part of the world to which the hemicycle of the apsis, in which the epicycle resides, has receded: but the apogee of the same circle reflects just as much to the opposite part. These things being so, it is clear that the inclinations of the perigees increase the latitudes of the apsides, and those of the perigees diminish them. For example, if the center of the epicycle, having left the ascending node, moves northward, and the perigee of the small circle by a certain ratio similarly inclines northward from the plane of the apsis, and the apogee of the same deflects just as much towards the ecliptic in the opposite direction, it is clear that the planet, moving through the perigee of the epicycle, and wandering outside both planes, will acquire a greater latitude than the distance of the eccentric from the ecliptic: but much less, if it travels through the apogee or the upper parts of the epicycle, and remains enclosed in the middle of the deferent and ecliptic planes. In the same way, when the center of the epicycle, having passed the descending node, slides beyond the ecliptic to the south, the perigees of the epicycle similarly inclined to the south, if the planet then passes through them, will acquire a greater latitude than the distance of the apsis from the ecliptic: but less, if it is carried through the apogee of the same epicycle: then it will remain between the deferent and the ecliptic circle. From all these, it is clear that the latitudes of the individual parts of the apsis vary in many ways according to the varied inclination of the epicycle. The latitudes described in the tables of motions, however, only show that variation which occurs when the center of the epicycle moves through the limits of the stars' greatest latitude. We have also included here for you the latitudes of the apogees and perigees of the three superior planets in their epicycles, from which the greatest variation of the deferents' distance from the ecliptic, which is caused by the inclination of the apogees and perigees, is manifest. SATURN, with the center of its epicycle holding the greatest latitude: Northern limit, Southern limit. Culminating or joined to the Sun, has latitude north 2.31. Depressed to the bottom of the epicycle or opposite the Sun, has latitude south 2.31. Culminating or joined to the Sun, has latitude north 3.31. Depressed or opposite the Sun, has latitude south 3.12. JUPITER, with the center of its epicycle illuminating the greatest latitude: Northern limit, Southern limit. Culminating deviates to the north 1.4.10. Depressed deviates to the north 2.5.1. Culminating deviates to the south 2.8.18. Depressed deviates to the south 1.6.14. MARS, with the center of its epicycle illuminating the greatest latitude: Northern limit, Southern limit. Culminating deviates to the north 1.6.1. Depressed deviates to the north 2.1. Culminating deviates to the south 0.24. Depressed deviates to the south 7.30.1. The remaining

[Planetary Latitudes and Anomalies]
The remaining changes in latitudes, which accompany the position of the planets outside the apogee line of the epicycle, and which occur when the center of the epicycle wanders beyond the limits of the greatest latitude, must be sought from tables. And according to the astrological principle, as the center of the epicycle deviates much or little from the mean limits, it must be derived through the anomaly of the eccentric and the anomaly of commutation. Indeed, by the coequated anomaly of commutation, the number of the latitude itself is obtained, and by the absolute anomaly of the eccentric, the proportional minutes are to be extracted. And from these, the proportional minutes corresponding to the number of the latitude are to be retained for the sought latitude of the star. And lest you err, and that you may rightly understand the whole substance of this matter, you must keep in mind the difference between the places of the apogees and the places of the limits of maximum latitude, for these are different. From the apogees of the apsides, the stars, approaching the earth more closely, descend; but receding from the limits of the greatest latitude, they proceed to the nodes. However, the apogee points of Mars are very far removed from the ecliptic, and therefore coincide with its points of greatest latitude. But the limit of the greatest latitude of Saturn precedes the apogee of the eccentric, and is removed from it by 50 parts of the heavens in the direction of the signs, so that the center of its epicycle, advanced through the consequent signs, passes the limit of the greatest latitude before the apogee of the eccentric. But the limit of the greatest latitude of Jupiter follows the apogee of its eccentric, and recedes from it by 20 parts of the heavens in the direction of the signs. Therefore, by adding 20 parts to Jupiter's apogee, and subtracting 50 parts from Saturn's apogee, the places of all the limits and nodes are easily described, as you see. NODES: ascending, descending. P. 8, 26, 2, 2, 8, 26, 27, m, 28, 15, 28, 003. Limits of greatest latitude: North, South. P. 8, M, +, P. 8, 4, P. 4, P. 26, 1, P. 272, P. 27, P. 1ST, II, P. 28, m, P. 28. Therefore, since in Mars the apsides of the eccentric and the limits of the greatest latitudes exist simultaneously, it is for this reason that by the coequated anomaly of the eccentric, similarly as in the Moon, by its true motion in latitude, we easily deduce the quality of its latitude, whether it is northern or southern. For when the coequated anomaly of Mars' eccentric is either nothing or a full semicircle, it indicates that the center of the epicycle is at the limits of the greatest latitude; northern, indeed, when that anomaly is nothing, and southern when it is a semicircle. But when it is equal to three-quarters of a circle, the center of the epicycle occupies the ascending node, from which it gradually moves northward; but when it is equal to a quadrant, the center of the epicycle likewise occupies the other node, from which it descends southward from the ecliptic. Thus, Mars ascends in latitude from the perigee to the north, and descends from the apogee to the south. Venus and Mercury do almost the same, but the difference is made by the diverse departure of the apsides, which in Venus is always northern, and in Mercury always southern. Furthermore, the stars of Saturn and Jupiter plainly reject this law, because the limit of the greatest northern latitude is placed for Saturn 50 parts before the apogee of the eccentric, and for Jupiter 20 parts beyond the apogee. And this is the reason why in Saturn's tables it is prescribed that the southern latitude is to be extracted by its anomaly of commutation when the coequated anomaly of the eccentric is greater than 40 parts and less than 220 parts; but northern for the remaining hemicycle of the eccentric anomaly. Similarly in Jupiter, the southern latitude is taken by the anomaly of commutation when the coequated anomaly of the eccentric is greater than 110 parts and less than 290 parts; but northern for the remaining hemicycle of the eccentric. Therefore, the latitude of Saturn and Jupiter does not ascend northward from the perigees of their eccentrics, as Mars does, but rather from the southern limits of greatest latitude; and similarly, it does not descend southward from the apogees, but rather from the northern limits of latitude. In our example, in the calculation of Saturn, the coequated anomaly of the eccentric was found to be 114 degrees, 32 minutes, 18 seconds, 142 thirds, to which correspond proportional minutes of 57, 14, 50, 29. The coequated anomaly of commutation was found to be 1 sign, 15 degrees, 33 minutes, 18 seconds, 22 thirds, by entering which into the table of southern latitude (because the anomaly of the eccentric greatly exceeds 40 parts and is less than 220 parts), we find the corresponding number to be 2 degrees, 9 minutes, 1 second. This, multiplied by the proportional minutes of 57, 1, 50, 2, yields the numbers 2 degrees, 41 minutes, 20 seconds, 2, 30 thirds, for the southern latitude of Saturn, descending from the northern limit of latitude beyond the ecliptic to the south, and distant by scarcely 15 parts from the southern limit. This is indicated by the number 1641, which is less than a semicircle, formed by the coequated anomaly of the eccentric with the 50 parts by which Saturn's northern limit precedes the apogee of the eccentric. From this, our common and irrevocable error in the first difference, published in so many copies, can easily be corrected, where, calculating the same example, we carelessly said that Saturn was southern and descending from the apogee of the eccentric, which is indeed very true, but wrongly applied to the descent of latitude, which has different limits from the apogees. Hence, multiplying the proportional minutes of 25, 10, 28, 2, 22, 3, corresponding to Jupiter's eccentric anomaly, by the latitude of 1 degree, 7 minutes, 1 second, corresponding to Jupiter's commutation in the table of southern latitude (for Jupiter's coequated eccentric anomaly, being 264 parts, is greater than 110 parts and less than 290 parts), we produced 0 degrees, 28 minutes, 1 second, 26, 2, 38, 3. This is Jupiter's southern latitude, ascending northward from the southern limit, which is clearly indicated by the number 224, less than a hemicycle, remaining after subtracting 20 parts from the eccentric anomaly. Finally, multiplying the minutes of 7, 1, 56, 28, 26, 3, corresponding to Mars' eccentric anomaly, by the numbers of southern latitude corresponding to Mars' commutation, namely 6 degrees, 35 minutes, 18 seconds, 2, 28, 30, 3, we produced 0 degrees, 32 minutes, 13 seconds, 16, 23, 54, 3, which is Mars' southern latitude, having recently passed the descending node and progressing southward from the ecliptic. This is indicated by the number of 108 parts of the eccentric anomaly, exceeding a quadrant and falling short of a semicircle. Having explained the reason for the latitude of the three superior planets, it remains to explain the same for the two inferior planets. However, since their latitudes are found to be even more variable, they are distinguished by a triple ratio or difference, one of which is attributed to the eccentrics, and the other two to the epicycles. The first latitude, which the departure of the eccentric from the ecliptic causes, is almost such as in the three superior planets; but the difference is in this, that the apsides of the three superior planets maintain a constant distance from the ecliptic, while the apsides of the two inferior planets, like cradles constantly agitated on a diameter connecting the nodes, sometimes unite with the ecliptic, and sometimes, receding from it and then approaching it again, are accustomed to be distant from the ecliptic by plainly unstable intervals. For when the centers of the epicycles occupy the nodes, the apsides are conjoined with the ecliptic without any departure. Then, when the centers of the epicycles, having left the nodes, proceed to the auges of the equant or the limits of maximum latitude, then the apsides themselves, leaving the centers of the epicycles and having left the ecliptic, gradually depart to its sides, and having traversed a quadrant, similarly approach the ecliptic again. However, this departure of the apsis, agitated here and there, as I said, from the ecliptic, in Venus is always northern, and when it is greatest, it contains 10 minutes; but in Mercury it is always northern, never exceeding an amplitude of 45 minutes, 12 seconds. For it has been found that the center of Venus's epicycle is never carried otherwise than towards the north, both around the apogee and around the perigee; but Mercury's only towards the south. This is the first reason for the latitude of Venus and Mercury, which Ptolemy calls the inclination of the eccentric, and our artists call the deviation. Of the remaining two reasons attributed to the epicycle, one, which Ptolemy calls the inclination of the epicycle, and our artists call the declination, they have in common with the three superior planets, by which, as has been said, latitudes are changed by the inclination of the epicycle's apogee and perigee from the plane of the deferent; the other is proper and peculiar, called by Ptolemy the oblique.

[Calculating Planetary Latitudes]
which by our authors is called reflection, or rather obliquation, by which the latitudes themselves are varied through the permutation of the points of the mean epicyclic longitude. Furthermore, in the tables of the motions of these latitudes, each is explained by peculiar canons, having their own proportional scruples attached. Therefore, the method of operation by which the latitude of Mars is derived, for each latitude, must be repeated once and for all, three times before all else. As for the quality of the latitude, the deviation of Venus, as we said a little earlier, is always northern, while that of Mercury is southern. The canons inscribed above indicate what kind of latitude the declinations and obliquations are. Having calculated these, if all the ratios of latitude are of one affection, the sum of all will give you the desired latitude: if not, we must compare the sum of two of one affection to the third remaining latitude, by subtracting the smaller from the larger. For the desired latitude will be the excess, retaining the name of that whose excess or remainder it was. Example: In the calculation of Venus, the equated anomaly of the eccentric is found to be sign 11, part 22, 34, and the anomaly of commutation is sign 1, part 12, 50. By means of these arcs, the deviation of Venus was found to be northern, 7 scruples, 13, 48, and the declination 6 scruples, 1, 33, southern: finally, the obliquation 57 scruples, 14, 25, northern. Furthermore, since the reflection agrees in name with the deviation, which is always northern, we must therefore combine these latitudes: having done so, we will produce part 1, 51, 13, from which, subtracting the declination latitude, which is southern, 6 scruples, 1, 33, there remains the latitude still northern, 58 scruples, 12, 40, of ascending Venus. In the same way, for Mercury, by the equated anomalies of the eccentric and commutation, of which the former is sign 6, part 10, 51, and the latter sign 4, part 5, 54, the deviation, which is always southern, was found to be 51 scruples, 18, 48, and the southern declination 17 scruples, 18, 51, and finally the northern obliquation was first calculated as part 2, 37, 20, and afterwards, by the addition of its tenth part, it became part 2, 53, 4. For in the calculation of Mercury's latitudes, the tenth part of the obliquation is rejected when the anomaly of the eccentric is either less than a quadrant or greater than three quadrants of a circle: but it is added through the remaining semicircle, that is, when the anomaly of the eccentric is greater than a quadrant and less than three quadrants, as in our example. Furthermore, the first two southern latitudes aggregated make part 1, 9, 39, which, rejecting the latitude of obliquation, we make the remaining latitude still northern, part 1, 43, 19, 25, of descending Mercury. In ephemerides, letters are also placed on the characters of the five planets, which show the ascent of the latitude to the northern limit, and the descent to the southern: MA for meridional ascending, SA for septentrional ascending, MD for meridional descending, SD for septentrional descending. If these letters are found in the middle of the columns, they indicate that around that day the planet changes from northern to southern latitude, or vice versa, or that having finished its ascent, it descends, or having reached the limit of its descent, it rises again. Finally, at the foot of the table of planets, the latitudes for the first, tenth, and twentieth day of the month, denominated by the letters just explained, are noted, which if one wishes to adapt to each intermediate day, the difference between the two immediately written latitudes must be divided by the number of intervening days: for the number of the section will indicate how much must be added or subtracted for each day, so that the certain latitude for the desired days is obtained. Concerning the latitude of the Moon to be found by the true motion of latitude, it has been said above. Although it is mostly omitted in the description of ephemerides, it is nevertheless easily extracted daily from the tables of the Moon's latitude in all ephemeris books described for this purpose, in the following manner. From the ephemeris, describe both the true motion of the Dragon's Head and the Moon in signs and parts of signs. From this, subtract the true motion of the Head from the true motion of the Moon, assuming, if necessary, twelve signs, so that the distance of the Moon from the Dragon's Head remains, which in Alfonso's and most other tables is called the true argument of the Moon's latitude, whose common signs are at the head or foot of the present table, and the parts on the right side, descending if those signs are at the top, but ascending on the left side if those signs are at the bottom of the table. For the number in the common angle, as they call it, will show you the desired latitude of the Moon: whether it should be called ascending or descending, northern or southern, the titles of the table clearly declare. In our example, the true motion of the Moon found is sign 10, part 27, 52, and the true motion of the Head is sign 8, part 25, 31. Now, subtracting the latter from the former, there remains the argument of the Moon, true, of 2 signs, 2 parts, 21, which in the table will show the Moon's latitude to be northern ascending, 4 parts, 25 scruples. And this is the Alfonsine method of the Moon's latitude, counting the argument from the ascending node of the Moon, and used by most who have compiled ephemerides. TABLE OF THE MOON'S LATITUDE. Northern Ascending. Signs 1, 2. Southern Descending. Signs 6, 7, 8. P. Sc. P. Sc. P. Sc. 2 304 20 29 1 0 5 4 344 22 28 2 0 10 2 Parts of the Argument. 394 25 27 3 0 16 2 434 27 26 4 0 21 2 484 30 25 5 0 26 2 5214 32 24 6 0 31 2 564 34 23 7 0 37 3 4 36 22 8 0 42 3 44 38 21 9 0 47 3 0 4 40 20 Parts of the Argument. 10 0 52 3. 134 42 19 0 57 3 174 44 18 12 1 2 3 21 4 45 17 13 1 7 3 244 47 16 (. 14 112 3 28/4 48 15 1 18 3 32 4 50 14 : 16 1 23 3 364 51 13 17 1 28 3 39 4 52 12 18 1 2 33 3 434 53 19 1 37 3 464 54 10 11 Pp 2 10 - 300. DIFFERENCE 20 1 4213 504 55 9 21 1 4713 534 56 8 22 1 523 564 57 7 Parts of the Argument. 23 1 573 594 58 6 24 2 2 4 3 4 58 5 25 2 7 4 6 4 59 4 26 2 1 4 9. 4. 59 3 27 2 164 12 5 2 28 2 21 4 145. 1 29 2 254 17.15 Signs 5: 4 3. Signs 11 10. Northern Descending. Southern Ascending. Parts of the Argument. If, following the calculation of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Salueldensis, you wish to measure the Moon's latitude from the northern limit, then from the Alfonsine argument of the Moon's latitude, which we have just designated as an example, sign 2, part 2, 21, you must subtract a quadrant or three common signs, adjusting with a whole circle if the matter so requires, so that you make the true motion of the Moon's latitude from the northern limit remain, which in the present example is sign 11, part 2, 21. By means of this, from the canon of latitude described in full at the end of the Prutenic tables, both the quantity and quality of the Moon's latitude are easily and no differently found than by the Alfonsine argument a little earlier extracted from the present table, namely, part 4, scruple 25, northern ascending. This latter method of finding the Moon's latitude was used by the most learned and diligent mathematician, our intimate friend Johannes Stadius, in his ephemerides recently calculated from the Prutenic tables and published in the year of the saving birth 1555. But, as I believe, being occupied with other matters, which often happens to the most learned and diligent men, he erred in this, that for obtaining the true motion of the Moon's latitude from the northern limit, he prescribed adding three signs to the Alfonsine argument, which, as I said, ought to be subtracted.

[Planetary Phases and Almugea]
The three higher planets, after they emerge from the Sun's rays, are called oriental, and are said to increase in strength up to 30 degrees from the Sun. After this, up to another 30 degrees, they are called strong or stronger oriental. When they have passed the Sun by 60 degrees, they are called oriental planets moving towards weakness, until they become retrograde. Then they are named oriental retrograde, until they are in opposition. After this, they will be occidental retrograde when they have passed opposition, until they reach direct motion. Then, from direct motion up to 60 degrees after direct motion, until their distance from the Sun is 30 degrees, they are called occidental moving towards weakness. Then they become weak occidental until they enter under the Sun's rays. The inferior planets, from the time they separate from the Sun, and are retrograde, are called weak oriental. They remain in this state until they reach their direct motion. Then they become strong oriental, until their distance from the Sun is as the Sun's distance from them was when they began to weaken, moving towards retrogradation. Then they become weak oriental until they are under the Sun's rays. After this, they are conjoined, then combust, moving towards appearance until they are seen. And from the time they separate from the Sun in direct motion up to 60 degrees, they are stronger. And from 60 degrees up to the hour of their retrogradation, they will be strong occidental. Until they are with the Sun, they will be weak. And when a planet emerges from under the Sun's rays and is not conjoined to any other planet, it is said to be in its own light. This is the state of planets with the luminaries. The third type of planetary condition is the collation of planets to the light, etc., the luminaries. And first, concerning the 'persona' or aspect of planets to the luminaries. For the Chaldean word 'Almugea' here signifies nothing other than such a configuration of planets with the Sun or Moon as their domiciles have with the domiciles of the luminaries. This occurs when there is as much interval between the planet and the Sun/Moon as the house of the planet is distant from the house of the Sun/Moon. This dignity is also approved by Ptolemy and is called 'idioprosopon'. His words are these: 'They are said to bear their own persona when each is configured with the Sun or Moon in the same way that their domiciles are with the domiciles of the luminaries.' For example, if Venus is in a sextile configuration with the luminaries, but in such a way that it is occidental to the Sun and oriental to the Moon, according to the original houses. Therefore, a planet is said to be in Almugea when there are as many signs from the Sun to the planet as there are from the Sun to the principal house of that planet according to the order of the signs. Otherwise, it would not be occidental, which is absolutely required in Almugea. For example, Saturn is in Almugea when it occupies the fifth sign after the Sun. The author says the sixth, which is to be understood inclusively, as if it were in Aries and Saturn in Capricorn, Saturn is said to be in the Almugea of the Sun. Similarly, if Jupiter is in the fifth sign from the Sun, Mars in the fourth, the Sun is said to see it face to face. For this is how the common people call this dignity. But it is also said to bear its own persona when it is in the following sign after the Sun, wherever the Sun may be, as when the Sun is in Aries and Venus in Virgo. Finally, Venus is said to be in Almugea when it has obtained the second sign, or rather the third inclusively, from the Sun, that is, when it is distant from the Sun by a sextile radiation, being occidental. This aspect can never occur exactly, since it never recedes from the Sun by so many signs. Therefore, this must be understood as an aspect 'in latitude'. Almugea of the Moon occurs for oriental planets remaining in the signs preceding the Moon's place, so that from the planet to the Moon, as many signs are counted as there are between Cancer and the secondary house of the planet against the succession of the signs. For example, Cancer and the secondary house of Saturn, namely Capricorn, are distant by a space of six signs. When, therefore, six signs are counted from the Moon according to the succession of the signs, there will be, as they call it, a 'face-to-face' vision between them, all of which is evident from the description provided for the eye. Almugea of the Sun: When from the Sun, inclusively, against the succession of the signs, there are 4 signs to the planet. Almugea of the Moon: When from the Moon, inclusively, according to the order of the signs, there are 4 signs to the planet. But Ptolemy, in Book 3, chapter 'On Parents', where he prefers occidental planets to the Sun and oriental planets to the Moon, seems to contradict this tradition, in which oriental and occidental are required from the Sun. We respond: It is true that planets are disposed as oriental to the Sun and occidental to the Moon. But if it ever happens that they are occidental, their best disposition, which they can achieve in such a state, will be when they are distant from the Sun by as many signs as their houses follow or precede the Sun. They call a planet 'victorious' when the star is in places similar to its own nature, which they call Hayz, and is in one of its angles, and moreover, the conditioning luminary is placed in an angle from it, so that by day the planet is oriental to the Sun, and by night occidental to the Moon. This will almost always happen if by day the planet is in the tenth sign from the Sun, for then, according to the equal distribution of houses, it can be in an angle from the Sun and oriental. By night, however, in the fourth sign from the Moon according to the order of the signs. For in this case also, it can be in an angle from the Moon and set after the Moon. But an opposite angle cannot apply here, for a planet opposite the luminaries is correctly said to be neither oriental nor occidental. However, I do not find this dignity in Ptolemy. And every planet placed under the rays, called 'subradiatus', 'plasmatis', which word, because it seemed harsher, the moderns preferred to call a planet affected in this way by the Sun's rays 'combust'. According to common opinion, a planet is said to be combust when it is less than half its orb distant from the Sun, or precisely so much before and after. But the author thinks more correctly and agrees more with Ptolemy, who states that planets are combust from the point of occultation to the point of emergence, where they first shine forth and appear, shedding the Sun's rays. However, this time or interval during which planets lie hidden under the Sun's rays is not constant due to the unequal ascent and descent of the signs, nor, as the author believes, always concluded by 12 parts before and after, but is variable many times due to different planets and signs. As can be seen in the following canon of occultation and emergence, translated here from the Prutenic tables, which indicates when both inferior and superior planets begin to appear or are occulted, which is very important to know, since a planet recently emerging into view from the Sun's rays obtains an excellent state, but when occulted, it lacks all strength. The use of the table is as follows: First of all, from the second face of the Ephemerides, or if it is possible to use the calculation of tables, the type of rising or setting must be known through the equated anomaly of commutation or epicycle, according to the doctrine to be explained. Afterwards, by the distance of the same star from the Sun, it must be investigated whether it is visible or not visible, whether it emerges, or whether it hides itself in the Sun's rays, in this way: Enter the canon of occultation and emergence with the sign in which the planet is, and extract the arc corresponding to that type of rising or setting. For if this arc is smaller than the planet's distance from the Sun, the planet will be visible. If it is larger, it will lie hidden within the Sun's rays. If it is equal, it will emerge or be occulted, as its distance from the Sun increases or decreases in the following days. In our example, the equated anomaly of Jupiter is 37 degrees, 13 minutes. Therefore, since it is clear from this that Jupiter is not far from the apogee of its epicycle, it is manifest that it is either visible a little after sunset, or hidden, oppressed by the Sun's rays at evening setting. The comparison of the longitude by which Jupiter and the Sun differ to the arc of vision easily resolves this hesitation. And it is

[Jupiter's Evening Occultation]
Jupiter in the 27th degree, 12th minute of Gemini, distant from the Sun by 18 degrees, 19th minute. The canon for the beginning of Gemini, under the title of Jupiter's evening occultation, shows 10 degrees, 16 minutes, an arc of vision smaller than Jupiter's distance, and therefore clearly indicates that Jupiter will soon enter the Sun's rays, still visible in the evening after sunset. Furthermore, since the canon assumes that planets hold the beginnings of dodecatemoria, when we find a planet traversing further parts of the dodecatemoria, by using the part corresponding to the degrees, we will arrive at an exact knowledge of this arc. In the present example, 30 parts of Gemini in the arc of Jupiter's evening vision make a difference of 1 degree, 28 minutes, of which the part corresponding to 27 parts is 1 degree, 6 minutes, which, combined with the arc assigned to the beginning of Gemini, produces an exact arc of vision of 22 degrees, 13 minutes, which itself declares Jupiter, though near its occultation, to be visible after sunset. Finally, it must be known that these arcs vary so much in each climate that a more exact investigation of these matters would require far more extensive canons. CANON V - Digitized by Google. 308; DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE CANON OF EMERSION AND OCCULTATION of the three superior planets... EMERSION.. MORNING RISING.. P. Scr. ♀ P. Scr. ☿ P.Scr. V 29. 28 19. 33 29. 0 ४ 26 26 18 21 27 11 II 22 10 14. 15 23 14 S 17 18 11 44 18 5 ^ 14 8 9 44 16 7 m 13 8 9 9 158 + 12. 15 9. 0 14 12 z 13 1 9 7: 158 + 13. 47 9. 44 16.7 ~ 16 36 11 44 18 15 = 21. 16 14 14 22. 14 X 26. 46 18 11 27 11 OCCULTATION.. Evening occultation.. V 340 281 14.12 ४ 147 9 38 158 II 55 10,16 167 S 17 9 11 44 18 15 ^ 14 48 13 32 22:14 m 12 0 15.23 27 11 + 223.2 16.7 29 0 z 21 20 15 23 27 11 + 1835 1334 22: 14 ~ 1636 11 44 18 15 = 14:40 10 16 16.7 X 14 0 938 15 12 Digitized by Google. 309 CANON OF EMERSION AND OCCULTATION of the two inferior planets. EMERSION. ♀ Evening rising. P. Scr. Morning occultation. P Scr. ☿ Evening rising. P. Scr. Morning occultation. P. Scr. V 15 34 4 25 24 10 12 29 ४ 13 48 4 29 21 15 12 18 II 10 39 7 38 17 10 13 37 S 8 38 8. 38 14 9 14 9 ^ 7 5 8 58 12. 53 16 39 m 6. 13 10 46 12 8 20 23 + 6. 57 11 9 12 10 23 50 z 7 11 11 26 12 41 23. 49 + 7 56 12 27 14 3 20 44 ~ 9 18 9 28 16 19 16 19 = 12. 47 8. 29 20 15 14 7 X 15 28 7 43 24 38 12 14. Morning rising ♀ Evening occultation. ☿ Morning rising Evening occultation. V 3: 36 2 27 22 43 12 9 ४ 4 9 3 30 21 23 12 12 II 5 14 8 47 22. 28 14:44 S 10 12 10 44 18 48 19 48 ^ 17 45 15 30 15:18. 23.25 m 23 40 7 43 13. 18 26 37 + 22. 27 6 40 12 29 25. 38 z 15 14 16 17 12 10 20 35 + 7 1 5 12 12 16 17 41 ~ 2 18 2 18 12 15 12 30 = 1 26 1 14 14 25 11 32 X 2 43 1 31 18 22 11 47 Q93. When a star is in the same degree as the Sun, and is distant from it by as much space as the apparent semidiameters of the Sun and the star combined, both in longitude and latitude, or less, it is said to be ἐν τῷ καρδίᾳ τοῦ ἡλίου εἶναι, that is, in the heart of the Sun, or, to use a foreign but common term among us, to be in Cazimi of the Sun. But if it is less distant than the said semidiameters in longitude, but more in latitude, it nevertheless remains combust. An example of such a conjunction is this: Let Venus be in 15 degrees, 44 minutes of Capricorn in mean longitude, where its apparent semidiameter is 4 minutes without latitude; and let the Sun be in 15 degrees, 24 minutes of the same Capricorn, where its apparent semidiameter is 16 minutes, 14 seconds, 30 thirds. They are therefore distant by 20 minutes. And because the Sun's semidiameter is 16 minutes, 18 seconds, 30 thirds, and Venus's apparent semidiameter is 4 minutes, the combined longitude from both semidiameters will be 20 minutes, 19 seconds, 30 thirds, which is more than the minutes of distance, which are at least 20 minutes. Given these conditions, we will say that the bodies of the Sun and Venus almost touch. For it is scarcely possible to know such a contact precisely, as Monteregius rightly warns in his tables of directions. Judge the same for the bodily conjunction of planets with the Moon, or of fixed stars with other planets, in all of which both latitude and longitude must be considered. For when they agree in longitude and latitude, they will effect a bodily conjunction, as it is called, and when they are more distant than their semidiameters by reason of latitude, they will effect at least a conjunction of longitude, as will be said shortly: Folio 196. We have already explained the apparent magnitudes of all stars above, at the beginning of the fifth difference. From this, the following section on the rising and apparent setting of wandering stars is closely related. A star is said to rise in the morning when it begins to be seen before the Sun's emergence; in the evening when it is seen after sunset. And a star is occulted in the morning when it ceases to be seen around dawn; in the evening, when it ceases to be seen after sunset. Given these conditions, it is clear that there are four general forms of this appearance: two of rising, and as many of setting; the summary of which we have described in a figure. Rising. Morning rising, when they begin to be seen before sunrise. Evening rising, a little after sunset. Morning occultation, when they begin to be occulted before sunrise. Evening occultation, in the evening after sunset. Furthermore, the three superior planets, like the fixed stars, from the conjunction with the Sun to its opposition, while descending from the apogee of the epicycle to its perigee, are called oriental (ἔῳοι καὶ προηγούμενοι), left behind by the Sun in precedence; but from the opposition to the conjunction, while ascending from the perigee of the epicycle to its apogee, they are called occidental (ἑσπέριοι καὶ ἑπόμενοι), and as if placed by the Sun in the following parts of the zodiac. Hence it is clear that they emerge from the Sun's rays in the morning, or as the Greeks say, ἐπιτέλλομεν, a little after the Sun's conjunction, when they have receded somewhat into the following parts (εἰς τὰ ἑπόμενα) from the apogee of the epicycle; and conversely, they are occulted and vanish in the evening (κρύπτεσθαι καὶ ἀφανίζεσθαι) a little before the Sun's conjunction, when, having been lifted from the perigee of the epicycle, they are not far from its apogee. Besides these two forms, they admit no others, except that when placed in the Sun's diameter, they are peculiarly called ἀκρόνυκτοι or ἀκρόνυχοι, because at the beginning of the night, when the Sun sets, they rise exactly opposite in the eastern horizon, whereas before, remaining beyond and within the first station, they always rose at night. But the Moon observes at least two forms, one of rising, the other of setting, contrary to the forms of the three superior planets. For in its very swift motion from conjunction to full moon, it rises in an evening rising unknown to the three superior planets; and then, having departed from opposition, it hastens to a morning setting likewise unknown to the three superior planets. But the two inferior planets, because they are, as it were, around the Sun.

[Translation of Light]
TRANSFER of nature from a lighter to a heavier planet. 6. If, however, neither of these is joined to the other, but each is joined to a third, then if that third planet aspects some place in the circle, it returns their light to that place: this is called the return of light. 7. Again, if one planet is not joined to another, but a third planet has transferred light to both, then this conjunction is also called the return of light. 8. Next follows prohibition, and it occurs in two ways. One, namely, by conjunction, that is, when there are three planets in one sign, but in different degrees: if the heavier planet has more degrees, then the one in the middle prohibits the former, that is, the one with fewer degrees, from joining the heavier until it passes it. In the second way, if two planets are in one sign, and the lighter joins the heavier, and another also joins the same heavier planet by aspect: then the one that is with it in one sign prohibits the aspecting planet from conjunction with the heavier, if the degrees of the one joining and the one aspecting are equal, that is, of the same number. But if the one aspecting is closer in degrees to the heavier, it will be the conjunction of the aspecting planet. 9. And if a planet is joined to the ruler of the sign in which it is, or to the ruler of its exaltation, or to the ruler of its other dignities, it is said to 'strike', that is, to send the nature of that ruling planet, namely, of the same dignity, to it. 10. And if a planet is in one of its dignities, and is joined to another planet which also has a part of dignity in the same place: it also sends to it both natures, its own and that of the one to which it is joined: and this entire sending is called Alcochod, that is, reception. 11. Now follows the return, that is, when a planet returns virtue to another planet that is combust, that is, under the Sun's rays, or retrograde, because of its own weakness, which it cannot retain. Then if both planets are in an angle or succedent houses, the return will be with profit: similarly if the one joining it is only in an angle, and the one to which it is joined receives it. But if the planet that joins is cadent from an angle, and the one to which it is joined is in an angle or succedent house, or if both are cadent, the return will be with detriment. 12. Next follows Almenen, that is, refranation, which occurs when a planet wants to join another, but before it joins, retrogradation occurs, and thus its conjunction is destroyed. 13. This is followed by Alichorad, that is, accidental contrariety. This occurs when a light planet has many degrees in a sign, and another, heavier than it, has fewer degrees, and a third, lighter than the first, wants to join the heavier: but before it joins it, the lighter one with more degrees becomes retrograde, and joins and applies to that heavy one, and passing it, also joins another lighter planet: and thus the conjunction of the former with the heavy one is destroyed. 14. Next follows Alfazim, that is, frustration. This also occurs when a planet seeks the conjunction of another planet, but before it reaches it, this one changes into another sign, and there will be some planet in few degrees aspecting that sign, and its rays will be at the beginning of the sign. And when the following planet leaves the first sign, it joins this aspecting one, and the conjunction it had with that one, namely with the first, is annulled. 15. Hence follows the cutting off of light, that is: when a planet seeks the conjunction of another, and is in the second sign from the sign of the other planet to which it is joined: but before it joins it, the one in the second sign first becomes retrograde, and joins it and cuts off its light from the planet that previously wanted to join. 16. Similarly, if a light planet is applying to the conjunction of another planet, and that other planet to which it wants to join seeks the conjunction of another planet heavier than itself: but before the light planet reaches the degrees of the heavier one, the heavier one joins another planet heavier than itself, and cuts off its light from the first lighter planet. 17. Next follows the fourth kind of passions that happen to planets when compared to each other. The first event of this kind is syzygy, or conjunction: which occurs when stars are either in one region of the sky, or in the radiation of fire, or finally, when they aspect each other by antiscion. For the word syzygy is general, and signifies not only application or coition, but also testimony by aspect. And Ptolemy's phrase in the fourth book of his Apotelesmatics sufficiently indicates that these words are to be distinguished in this way, where, speaking of the geometricians, he wrote: 'nor do the rhomboidal ones, which are distant from the anaphas, receive good wives by conjunction and by testimony, if the malefics are contrary.' Furthermore, of conjunctions, some are partile or perfect, others are platical or imperfect. But of those, etc. imperfect. And of partile conjunctions, some are of longitude, others of latitude, the most absolute of all conjunctions. And in a partile conjunction of longitude, stars are joined when they are found either in one circle described through the points of the zodiac, or in different ones, but nevertheless aspecting each other partilely through parts of the ecliptic, even if they are separated by latitude towards the sides of the world. As if the Sun is at the beginning of Leo, and Mars is there with its maximum southern latitude, then Mars is said to be partilely joined to the Sun according to longitude, even if they are separated by a space of seven degrees of latitude in the sky. Similarly, one should judge concerning the conjunctions of aspects. But stars cohere in a partile conjunction of latitude when, besides the agreement of longitude, they also agree in latitude. This is observed by Ptolemy, neglecting aspects in the bodily conjunctions of the Sun and stars, and also, as it seems, in diametrical oppositions, whence it deserves to be called a bodily syzygy. And although the bodies of the stars pass to opposition in at least one case: nevertheless, it is manifest that they can meet in bodies in several ways. First, if, as the author says, in the application of conjunction, tending simultaneously to one side of the world, what latitude they acquire. As if the Moon and Mars, agreeing in minutes of longitude, and tending simultaneously to the maximum northern limit of latitude, or thence to the ascending node, have equal latitude, they will conjoin most perfectly both in longitude and in latitude. Then stars can be corporally and most perfectly conjoined, even if they travel to different limits or nodes, provided their latitudes are of the same form, that is, northern or southern and equal: and this is what the author says, that in this case it must happen that the latitude of one is ascending in the north, and that of the other descending in the north: or of one ascending in the south, and of the other descending in the south. For example, if the Moon and Saturn agree in parts and minutes according to longitude such that Saturn is near its ascending node, and having entered the north, has already acquired a northern latitude of three minutes: and the Moon, descending from the northern limit, is approaching its descending node, decreasing its northern latitude, and is similarly distant from the Ecliptic by three minutes, a bodily syzygy of the Moon and Saturn will be effected, that is, a most perfect conjunction of bodies, as far as longitude and latitude are concerned, so much so that the Moon in such a meeting of those stars would deprive us of their sight, unless a very large parallax, or, as they call it, diversity of aspect, prevented it. Then, from the bodily coition, beyond and on this side, forwards and backwards, by the space that the apparent semidiameters of both luminaries compose, receding, they maintain a platical conjunction as long as, as will be said presently, their rays are mixed. From what I have said, what a bodily syzygy of stars is, is clear. It remains for us to explain the bodily configuration, that is, the bodily conjunctions of aspects, of which the diametrical one not only has diverse and equal, but also contrary latitudes, that is, one northern, the other southern.

[Table of Trigon and Hexagon Latitudes]
2. A table explaining the latitude of the trigon and hexagon of stars more than 8 parts distant from the Ecliptic. This is a clear ratio of bodily conjunctions, not involved in any obscure ambiguities, and if you consider the matter correctly, it almost agrees with Ptolemy's tradition concerning the equicrural figure explained above. However, Blanchinus and many other astrologers, by no means common, apply this theory not only to the conjunctions of bodies, but also to all other aspects and simple radiations, and they direct such empty places for stars, just as they observe the latitude of stellar bodies significantly distant from the Ecliptic. And since the circles of latitudes passing through the poles of the Ecliptic and the limits of radiations having latitude do not coincide at the limits of radiations simply calculated on the Ecliptic in the manner described above, but extend beyond the hexagon and within the trigon, therefore, in order to establish some equation of aspects, they use "prothaphairia" (scruples), the multitude of which varies according to the latitude of the planets whose aspects are being considered, as the series of numbers described here indicates to you. Latitude of planet. Scruples of prothaphairia. Latitude of planet. Scruples of prothaphairia. These scruples are added to hexagons and subtracted from trigons. For example, Mars, located at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Capricorn, with a southern latitude of 7 parts, has a sinister sextile aspect falling at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Pisces. If you add 111 scruples, corresponding to seven parts of latitude, you will find the equated sinister aspect of Mars falls exactly at the end of 16 degrees of Pisces, with a southern latitude of 3 degrees 29 minutes 19 seconds 37 parts 28. However, the sinister trine radiation of the same Mars, which, simply calculated by longitude, falls at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Taurus, when it omits the same 111 scruples due to the equation, ends at 15 degrees 48 minutes of Taurus, with a northern latitude of 3 degrees 29 minutes 1 second 37 parts 2. The same judgment applies to dexter radiations. I, however, could find no cause worthy of mention that could or should have impelled practitioners to follow this laborious and troublesome operation, which seems to display much ostentation and no fruit. Some have presented it as fortified by the authority of Monteregius. But not carefully enough. For Monteregius rejects this method of operation as weak and useless, so far is he from approving it, and teaches how to translate the bare and simple radiations of stars endowed with latitude to the Ecliptic without any observation of latitude, in this way: Every star, like all others, also emits those most efficacious rays which we observe in an orbicular manner, so that for a hexagonal radiation we have the periphery of that circle, which is described by one side of a large celestial hexagon inscribed in such a way that one extremity of the said side, ending at the center of the star, remains fixed, and the side itself, together with the limiting extension, is rotated so that it returns to the place from which it began to move. Similarly, one must judge concerning all other radiations, except that Monteregius, no differently than Blanchinus, wished the place of a square radiation to always be distant from the place of the planet's longitude by a quadrant of the Ecliptic, and the opposite radiation to end at the diameter's terminus. These things being so, it is clear that a hexagonal ray does not penetrate the Ecliptic in any part of itself if the star's latitude exceeds 60 parts; but it intersects the Ecliptic in two places if the star's latitude is less than 60 parts. Example: Let it be decreed to explore to what parts of the Ecliptic Mars projects its sextile rays, being placed at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Capricorn, with a southern latitude of 7 parts. If you now wish to clearly experience this on a celestial globe, first of all find the place of Mars, both in longitude and latitude, on the instrument. This done, then with a compass, opened to the interval of the side of the hexagon calculated on the Ecliptic, or what is the same, on the equinoctial, describe from the place of Mars as a center the periphery of a circle, representing the hexagonal radiation of Mars, which periphery, intersecting the Ecliptic in two places equally distant from the star on either side, that is, 59 degrees 45 minutes 1 second, will define to the left the limit of the sinister sextile radiation, and to the right the terminus of the dexter sextile radiation. In the same way, one must think about the termini of both trine and square radiations. The table of rays inscribed here, which defines the places of both trine and sextile radiations, explains to you the variety of these intervals, which different stellar latitudes create. TABLE OF RAYS for the hexagonal and trine radiation of Monteregius. Arc of Latitude, Ecliptic. If, therefore, according to Monteregius's opinion, you wish to equate the radiations or aspects of stars endowed with noteworthy latitude, and to prepare them for deductions, which they call directions, within the table of rays with the planet's latitude, an arc of the Ecliptic will immediately present itself to you, defining the longitude of the dexter and sinister hexagonal radiation to be calculated from the place of the star's longitude. When this is subtracted from 60 parts, the scruples of equation will remain to be subtracted from the longitude of both sextile radiations, but to be added to the longitude of both trine radiations, so that the equated longitude of all these aspects may appear. According to this method, therefore, Mars, constituted at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Capricorn, with a northern latitude of 7 parts, extends its dexter hexagonal ray to 15 degrees 34 minutes 18 seconds of Scorpio, and its sinister ray to 15 degrees 34 minutes 1 second of Pisces. But it projects its dexter trine radiation to 16 degrees 41 minutes of Virgo, and its sinister to 16 degrees 41 minutes of Taurus. The longitudes of square radiations, whose dexter extends to 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Libra, and sinister to 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Aries, as has been said, require no such equation. Similarly, neither does the longitude of the diameter, which ends at 15 degrees 49 minutes 1 second of Cancer. However, stars lacking latitude, or rather, not more than 1 degree 4 minutes 1 second distant from the Ecliptic, universally maintain the longitude of all radiations without any equation. From these, the difference between the operations of Blanchinus and Monteregius is clear. For in one, the longitude of the hexagons is increased, while in the other, it is diminished. A similar contradiction is observed in the equation of trine radiations. Leaving it open which of these opinions is truer, for two main reasons it seemed best not to approve either at present: first, because however great the latitude, it can make little difference to the aspects, whether taken from the Ecliptic or by the said methods, so much so that eight parts of latitude make scarcely 20 scruples of difference in places in the ray. The second and most important reason is the authority of Ptolemy, who stated that latitudes should be observed not in the aspects of rays, but in the bodily conjunctions of stars, and then only if the stars meet in one sign. Example: If the Moon is 16 parts distant from the Sun, having a latitude of 7 or 8 parts, it will certainly be outside the Sun's rays. The reason why it is not appropriate to observe latitudes in aspects, he says, is that the rays of the planets are not considered as they come from one to the extremity of the world to the other, but as both rays come to the center of the earth, and form an angle in them. His words at the end of the first book of Apotelesmatics are these: "And generally, those that precede are said to be conjoined with those that follow, and those that follow are said to be separated from those that precede, when there is a great distance between them. And this is taken easily, especially if it happens according to the given calculations, except that for the bodily conjunctions and emanations themselves, and latitudes, one must observe."

[Planetary Latitudes and Aspects]
However, universally, preceding planets are said to apply to succeeding ones. Succeeding planets, however, are said to flow from preceding ones, provided they are not separated by a long interval. This applies to both their bodily conjunctions and configurations, except that in the applications and flows of bodies, it is useful to observe their latitudes. For only those conjunctions are admitted which are found in the same parts of the Ecliptic. In configurations, however, such care is superfluous, since all rays are carried to the same point, that is, to the center of the earth, and thus, emitted from anywhere, they always concur. From these words of Ptolemy, it seems to follow that in lunar conjunctions, latitude must be observed, but not in any other aspects. And although Cardan explains this text in this way, and the matter itself holds true (for a bodily conjunction of stars cannot be effective unless they have equal latitudes, and not only in one circle of latitude, but also situated in the same parts of the Ecliptic), nevertheless, we believe that in other aspects too, the observation of stellar latitude, if it refers not to the variety of intervals but to the strength of the aspects, has great importance. For if, for example, an opposition of Mars and Venus occurs, who can doubt that such an opposition will be far more effective and powerful if Mars and Venus have contrary latitudes, than if they both traversed the north or south? Otherwise, what was said above from Ptolemy's opinion about the figure of the equicrural triangle could have no place. And to pass over in silence the trine radiation, there is no doubt that all other bodily aspects gain strength if they are carried from one part of the Ecliptic, and conversely become weaker if they have contrary latitudes. For this reason, it is written in Ptolemy that one of the causes why anaretic places do not always universally have the power to kill is the contrary latitude of the Apheta and Anareta's body. "For the anaretic part is impeded," he says, "if both bodies, that which meets and that which governs, do not have the same latitude or latitude in the same parts." Hence it is clear that the encounter becomes stronger if the Apheta and Anareta agree in southern or northern latitude, but weaker if they disagree. From this, it is evident that Ptolemy here does not entirely reject the conjunctions of stars made in both parts of the Ecliptic, but attributes greater and more powerful force and perfection to conjunctions made in the same parts of the Ecliptic. Indeed, if the latitude is from the same part of the Ecliptic, but unequal, a lesser effect will follow, because body can never penetrate body. But the exact observation of latitudes changes not the intervals, as I said, of radiations, but the strength of the stars. For just as the fixed stars, so also the planets, the closer they are to the Ecliptic, the more evident effects they produce; the more remote, the more obscurely they act, always universally, whether they are near the Ecliptic or very far from it, intending one end of action and one kind of effects, since the natural action of all celestial bodies is rightly referred to the orbit of the Sun, who is the ruler of Olympus, the source of life and light. But why do the latitudes of the stars not change the intervals of configurations in the Ecliptic? Because, as Ptolemy says, all rays are carried to the center of the earth, and thus, emitted from anywhere, they always concur. For greater clarity, let Jupiter be in 15 degrees of Cancer with 2 degrees of southern latitude, and in 15 degrees of Scorpio with 7 degrees of southern latitude. I say that the bodily rays of Mars and Jupiter, concurring at the innermost point of the earth, are equidistant from all sides, that is, by the space of one right angle and a third part of it, or what is the same, by 120 degrees. To understand this more deeply, imagine the orbital radius of each planet, one drawn through a line extended from the center of the earth to the body of Mars, and completely revolved through both poles of the zodiac; the other drawn through another line similarly extending from the center of the earth to the body of Jupiter, and circumducted through the same poles of the zodiac. These things being so, it is manifest that the two hemicycles of the great circles intersect each other on the axis of the Ecliptic passing through the center of the earth, and that in any part beyond or within the Ecliptic, observed equality of angle, they are distant from each other. Similarly, one must think about all other radiations, namely, that they are hemicycles ending at the poles of the zodiac. Since these things are so, it is clear that neither the opinion of Blanchinus, who imagines aspects on the periphery of a circle inclined to the Ecliptic, nor that of Monteregius, who thinks that rays diffused from the bodies of stars as centers are orbs, agrees with Ptolemy's view. As has been shown, Ptolemy transfers all rays into hemicycles intersected at the poles of the zodiac, whose intervals calculated in the Ecliptic are plainly similar to any intervals proceeding towards either pole of the zodiac. And this is the greatest praise of Ptolemy's opinion, that through it, planets are connected not only to stars closely adjacent to the zodiac, but also to all others that weave the entire sky, in one circuit, which no other imagination can achieve. For example, the star shining in the left hand of Perseus and the head of Medusa, called Gorgonion and the head of the Gorgon, has a northern latitude of 23 degrees, which Mars never reaches. And yet, according to this reasoning, these stars will rightly be said to be conjoined when Mars travels through 20 degrees of Taurus, for such is approximately the distance of the Gorgon from the apparent equinox in our time. Such a conjunction will be far more powerful if Mars is in the north with the greatest latitude it can attain. And that Ptolemy approves of such conjunctions can be proven by many of his sayings. For example, in the place cited a little earlier, where he teaches how to infer the number of wives, he writes thus: "If the Moon is in a bicorporeal or multiform sign, or applies to several stars existing in such a sign, it indicates that men will frequently repeat marriage." Here, the signs δίσωμα (bicorporeal) and πολύμορφα (multiform) must be distinguished. For some signs that double the number fall within the zodiac, such as Gemini, Pisces, and Sagittarius, and are called δίσωμα. Others, however, reside outside the zodiac, such as Centaurus, Auriga, Bootes, Hercules, Hydra, and are properly called πολύμορφα, that is, multiform or multiple, none of which, due to their great distance from the Ecliptic, can have the Moon's five parts of latitude.

[Planetary Conjunctions and Separations]
It can enter, never exceeding 338 degrees of latitude, and yet it is said to reside in them when they are in the same longitude. It should not seem strange to anyone that we have dwelt at length on this, because of the constant dispute among practitioners regarding the measurement of ray intervals, the distinction of which through the said hemicycles, if it truly agrees with Ptolemy's opinion, certainly the opinions of Bianchini and Monte, and all others who in any way equate longitude, can not only be considered unnecessary for the practice of the art, but also erroneous. The very method of directing, as they call it, proposed by Ptolemy in Book 3, Chapter on the Length of Life, helps us, where he explicitly states that the strength or power of the stars changes only by reason of latitude, and that the times defined by progression do not vary. For although a star may have little or great latitude, yet for the completion of a direction, it always assumes the hourly times of the Ecliptic part of longitude, that is, of that part of the Ecliptic which the hemicycle passing through the poles of the zodiac and the star defines, just as if the star were traversing the Ecliptic. For if he had thought that the latitudes of the stars could bring any other variation to the times to be defined by direction, that man of immense diligence would undoubtedly not have passed over so great and important a matter in silence. But now it is time to explain the remaining types of conjunctions. Platic conjunctions are those which similarly exist either in one sign or in conjoined signs, but are said to occur according to a broader coherence of rays. This is subdivided into κόλλησιν καὶ ἀπόρροια, that is, agglutination or application and defluxion, which they call separation. Application occurs when the lighter planet follows the heavier, and approaches a partial conjunction with it. Defluxion or separation occurs whenever the lighter planet, existing in more parts, recedes from the heavier: it is sufficient, however, that the lighter, if it is not in more parts, at least recedes by one scruple or more, since their bodies very rarely come together due to the dissimilarity of latitudes: as if it is in 28 degrees 6 minutes, and in 28 degrees 7 minutes of the same sign, the Moon is said to recede from the Sun. But judges disagree as to how much space the mixed force of the rays coheres. The author believes that application and defluxion last as long as the body or primary ray of the lighter planet is 6 degrees distant from the heavier or its ray. The common opinion is that the conjunction of planets lasts as long as their rays are mixed, that is, cohering by touching each other by half of both orbs. In this way, existing in 5 degrees 2 minutes, applies to Saturn traversing 29 degrees of the same sign, and thus in 6 degrees, applies to Saturn residing in 27 degrees, for the difference is 21 degrees, which is made up of the semidiameters of the composite orbs, whose spaces are indicated above: the semidiameter of the Sun is 15 degrees, of the Moon 12 degrees and 49 minutes, of 8 degrees and 7 degrees. Therefore, if is in 3 degrees, and in 26 degrees, then the Sun will be said to apply and go to Mars, and this continues until, by its faster motion, it reaches a part similar to the 5th part of Leo in which Mars is located, and joins it partially. Haly wished that applications occur from three degrees before, and separations one degree beyond the heavier, yet he did not neglect the application according to the quantity of the orbs. Guido says: When one planet projects its rays upon the rays of another, and is distant from it by the space that the semidiameters of both orbs make up: then the lighter is said to seek the conjunction of the heavier, and signifies the effect of the matter, unless another planet destroys such a conjunction. But if they are distant by half of the orb of the other, the conjunction already completed will likewise signify the effect of the matter, unless it is impeded elsewhere. Finally, if the half of the orb of the faster touches the body of the heavier, then the heavier is said to be in the parts of the lighter. It is undoubtedly true that Cardan weighed these limits more diligently and defined them more accurately and truly according to Ptolemy's opinion: therefore, I think he, as an expert, should be followed here above all. Furthermore, the spaces of the sky in which the bodies of the stars and their rays cohere, as Ptolemy indicates, are in 17 degrees, Moon 12 degrees, 4 degrees, 12 degrees, 10 degrees, 7 degrees, 8 degrees, and 7 degrees. Therefore, when the planet to which the application is made, or from which the defluxion occurs, is not more distant from the one applying or separating than the parts assigned in the table, it is called an application or defluxion, so that those parts are understood of the planet to which the application is made, or from which the defluxion occurs, and not of the one that flows away or applies: diligently observing that the application is stronger than the defluxion, and the closer the application is by aspect or body, and the less the separation has receded, the more effective the conjunction is to be judged. For as Cardan wrote, the forces of aspects are like the labor of bending a ballista. For a conjunction or aspect from two parts is ten times that which occurs with a distance of ten parts: and that which is from the same part, ten times that which occurs with a distance of two parts: and that which is by six minutes, ten times that which occurs by a distance of almost one part, whence the greatest events. Also observe that for the application of the lighter to the heavier to occur, it is necessary for the heavier to have completed more degrees in its sign, and the lighter fewer. The heavier or grave planets are called such by the slowness of their motion, such as the three superiors: the lighter ones by their speed, such as the three inferiors. From this it follows that a retrograde or diminished in course lighter planet becomes heavier by nature. In this way, retrograde Mercury is considered heavier than Venus, and this slow in course is considered heavier than the Sun. From what has been said, the first type of application and separation is the simplest and easiest. The second type of application is when both planets are retrograde, but the lighter is in more parts, and by moving faster, overtakes the heavier, as if is in 9 degrees retrograde, and in 8 degrees retrograde. Here, by retrograding faster, pursues Saturn, who is retrograding more slowly and tardily, and finally joins him. But if, with both retrograding, the lighter is in fewer parts, a violent or averse separation occurs, as if is in 8 degrees retrograde, and in 9 degrees retrograde. Here Venus separates from by contrary motion, because she moves faster than Saturn into the preceding signs. The third type of application and defluxion is called mutual. For mutual application occurs when two planets, one which is anterior by direct motion, and the other which follows by retrograde motion, meet each other, as if is in 1 degree.

[Difference in Obstruction]
The difference is that in the first case, the lightest planet is at the beginning of the following sign, and the other two are near the end of the preceding sign. In the case of contrariety, which was mentioned a little earlier, all three planets are in the same sign, and the retrograde planet encounters not only the heavier but also the lighter one. These two forms do not differ in any other respect, so you may correctly conclude both under one name, either contrariety or perturbation or interposition. Similarly, when the light planet seeks the heavier, but before it reaches it, the heavier planet joins another still heavier one, and thus the heaviest planet cuts off the light of the medium from the light one. For example, if Mars is in the 10th degree of Aries, Jupiter in the 9th degree of Aries, and Saturn in the 4th degree of Aries. Here Mars seeks Jupiter, but before it can join Jupiter, Jupiter conjoins Saturn, who cuts off the light of Jupiter from Mars. But this occurrence was called a prohibition above, for no distinction appears between these two. Therefore, since one of these cases pertains to perturbation and the other to prohibition, the cutting off of light still remains to be defined more accurately and properly. Therefore, the cutting off of light is when three planets are within their bounds, and the lightest is in fewer degrees, but by its course, surpassing the others, it overtakes the middle one and reaches the one in more degrees before the middle one joins it. Then that light and swift-moving planet is said to cut off the light of the middle one from the last, which is in more degrees. For example, if Jupiter is in the 28th degree of Taurus, Mars in the 14th degree of Taurus, and the Moon in the 7th degree of Taurus. Here Mars was going to Jupiter, but the Moon, with swifter motion, passing Mars, reaches Jupiter before Mars does, and cuts off the light of Mars from Jupiter. For although the Moon has not yet reached Jupiter, nor is it interposed between Mars and Jupiter, yet it must be judged as if it had already reached it, because everything that is potentially such obtains such power in actuality, from which source all these precepts have flowed. Similarly, the cutting off of light by the rays of another planet, but which is much weaker, is to be understood. For example, if Jupiter is in the 1st degree of Gemini, Mars in the 8th degree of Gemini, and the Moon in the 6th degree of Virgo, casting a ray into the 6th degree of Gemini. Here Mars was going to seek a conjunction with Jupiter, but the Moon, moving faster, passing Mars, having fallen from a square aspect to Jupiter, cuts off the light of Mars from Jupiter, etc.

[Fortunate and Unfortunate Places]
There are also places for these planets in which they are strengthened, and in which they are weakened, and places in which fortunes occur, and places in which misfortunes occur. But the places in which fortunes occur are these: that they are in the aspects of benefics, that is, in some useful aspect, namely a sextile or a trine aspect, because some call the hexagonal and trigonal radiation thus. And that malefics are cadent from them, separated from misfortune and joined to fortune; or that they are besieged by benefics or their rays, that is, that they are between two benefics or between the rays of benefics. This is indeed obsession, that a planet has a benefic or its rays before it, and another benefic or its rays behind it. And some call this 'altifert', that is, veneration. Or that they are united with the Sun in one degree, or that they are in its sextile or trine aspect, or a similar aspect of the Moon. The Moon is then fortunate, and that they are swift in course, augmented in light and number, or that they are in their dignities or in their Hayz, that is, in their similitude, so that a masculine planet is in a masculine sign, and a feminine planet in a feminine sign, and a diurnal planet in the day above the earth, and in the night below the earth, a nocturnal planet in the night above the earth, and in the day below the earth, and so on. That they are in signs in which they have their dignities or powers, or in their joys, or in bright degrees, received. And from their fortitude it is that they are ascending in the north, or are northern, or are ascending in the circle of their apogee, or in the second station, that is, when they are in the station where they are directed from retrogradation, or are emerging from under the Sun's rays, or are in an angle, or in its succedent. Or that three are higher and oriental from the Sun: for if they aspect with a sextile or trine aspect, this will be an increase of strength for them, or if they are in masculine quarters. And the Sun, when it is in those masculine quarters, or in masculine signs, will also be strong, unless it is in Libra, because there it falls. And from the strength of the three inferior planets it is that they are occidental from the Sun, or in feminine quarters. And from the strength of the Moon, that it is in the night above the earth, and in the day below the earth, in a feminine place, or in a feminine sign, when it is in the exaltation of the Sun. Regarding the misfortune of planets. From the misfortune and destruction of planets it is that they are in conjunction with malefics, or in opposition to them, or in their square, or trine, or sextile radiation. Or if there is between them and the body of a malefic or its rays less than the term of the planet, or if they are in the terms of malefics, or their houses, or if malefics are elevated above them from the 10th or 11th house from their places, and much worse if they do not receive them. Or if they are in conjunction with the Sun, or its opposition, or in a square radiation, or if they are in the heads of their Genzahar, or with their tails, or with the head of the Dragon or the tail, and there are between them and any of these places 12 degrees or less: and especially if the Moon is in any of them. Similarly, the Sun is then more impeded by them, that is, by the head or tail, when there are between it and one of them even 3 degrees before or after. Or if planets are besieged between two malefics, that is, that a planet is in some sign and with it a malefic, or its rays before it, and a malefic or its rays behind it; or it is separated from a malefic by conjunction, or by aspect, and joins another malefic in such a way: or if a malefic, or its rays, are in the sign that is before it, that is, in the second from it: and in the sign that is after it, that is, in the twelfth from it, there is another malefic, or its rays. Similarly, it is said of signs that they are besieged. But if a benefic or the Sun aspects the same besieged planet, or besieged sign, with a trine or sextile aspect: and there is between them a conjunction of less than seven degrees, that malice or obsession is resolved. And from this, that is, in misfortune, it is also that a planet is retrograde, or combust under the Sun's rays, or cadent from the ascendant. And from their debility it is that they are slow in course, or in the first station, that is, when they stand as if retrograde, or if they are in dark degrees: or if they are masculine in feminine signs: and in feminine degrees, in the day below the earth, and in the night above the earth, or if they are feminine in masculine signs: and in masculine degrees, in the night below the earth, and in the day above the earth.

[Planetary Strength and Weakness]
Planets that are combust, retrograde, slow, peregrine, afflicted by the malefic rays of malefics, and finally, cadent from the angles, are considered unfortunate and weak. If they have received equal votes from both sides, that is, if they are partly endowed with strength and certain prerogatives, but partly depressed by misfortunes, they are considered indifferent or mediocre. A similar brevity of this passage is found in Ptolemy, whose words in the beginning of Book 2 of the Apotelesmatics are these: "We consider whether they are ruling monarchically, both cosmically and natally, or the opposite. For they are most active when cosmically they are in their own or proper places, and again when they are oriental and in direct motion; but natally, when they precede the center in their return, and especially the first, I mean those in the ascensions and midheaven. But they are cosmically inactive when they are in alien places, or their own, and occidental, or in retrograde motion; and natally, when they decline from the centers." Therefore, the strength and weakness of planets according to Ptolemy are judged from four circumstances. First, in comparison to the world, when they are in their own, proper, alien, or non-domestic places. Second, in comparison to the Sun. For oriental planets are strong, occidental ones weak. Third, in comparison to their orbits. For swift planets in direct motion gain strength. Conversely, slow, retrograde planets lose it. Fourth, in comparison to the genesis or figure of the heavens. For in the centers, and especially in the ascendant and Midheaven, and also in succedent houses, they are strong, but in cadent houses, they are weak. I also thought it necessary to add here that Jupiter and Venus, when powerful and fortunate, have the greatest efficacy; but when weak and unfortunate, they are equated with mediocre planets and achieve little or nothing. Again, even fortunate planets placed in their splendors do less harm than when they are outside their prerogatives, unfortunate and weak. But mediocre and strong and fortunate planets are equated with benefics, while unfortunate and weak ones portend no less detriment than the malefics themselves. This opinion is confirmed by the torment of the 7th and 8th houses, he says: "When the lord of the ascendant is conjoined with the body in Leo, unless Mars himself has some dignity in the ascendant, or not even in the eighth house, the native will be burned." From this it is clear that planets do not only harm in places where they rule. We note the same in evil princes, who do not treat their own subjects as badly as they do strangers. Finally, the twelve cusps, planets, and lots are made fortunate by the presence and all good aspects of benefics, and by the good aspects of mediocre planets. But they are condemned and made unfortunate by the conjunctions and bad aspects of malefics, and of mediocre planets, and this if the aspects occur within the limits, or as most have taught, from the midpoint, and within the midpoint of their orbs. For example, if the cusp of the seventh house is at 12 degrees of Aries, and Jupiter is at 19 degrees of Aries. Here Jupiter, by its presence from the midpoint of its orb, which is 7 degrees, makes the cusp of the seventh house fortunate. The same is achieved by intermediate degrees. Nor is there any other judgment concerning aspects, as if Jupiter projects a ray to 21 degrees of Aries, there from the midpoint of its orb it would make the same cusp of the seventh house fortunate. Concerning the fortune and misfortune of the Sun and Moon, it has been said above. Concerning the friendship and hatred of the planets. And it is said among the planets that some of them love and hate each other: for concerning those who love, some of the ancients said that Jupiter loves all planets and is their friend, and they are his, except Mars. The friends of Venus are all planets, and all love her except Saturn. But the friends of Saturn are Jupiter, the Sun, and the Moon; his enemies are Mars and Venus, and she herself hates him more. And the friend of Mars is Venus, the other planets hate him, and Jupiter and the Sun more. But the friends of the Sun are Jupiter and Venus, and his enemies are Mars, Mercury, and the Moon. The friends of Mercury are only Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, and his enemies are the Sun, Moon, and Mars. But the friends of the Moon are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, and her enemies are Mars and Mercury. The friends of the Head of the Dragon are Jupiter and Venus, and its enemies are Saturn and Mars. But the friends of the Tail are Saturn and Mars, and its enemies are the Sun, Moon, Jupiter, and Venus. And there are other kinds of enmity: when two planets have their houses opposite, like Mars and Venus: when they are conjoined, it is called the opening of the gates. A third kind of enmity is when the exaltations of two planets are opposite. But the stronger friendship of planets is when a planet agrees with a planet in nature, quality, substance, and power, just as Mars agrees with the Sun, because both agree in heat, dryness, sharpness, and swiftness, and Mars is the lord of its exaltation, in which its strength appears: and just as the Moon and Venus agree in coldness and humidity, and Venus is the lady of its exaltation. But when two planets agree in nature and substance, like Jupiter and Venus, they are friends. Jupiter's friends are all except Mars. Venus's friends are all except Saturn. Saturn's friends are Jupiter, Sun, Moon; enemies are Mars and Venus, and Venus hates him more. Mars's friend is Venus; enemies are all others, especially Jupiter and Sun. Sun's friends are Jupiter and Venus; enemies are Mars, Mercury, Moon. Mercury's friends are Jupiter, Venus, Saturn; enemies are Sun, Moon, Mars. Moon's friends are Jupiter, Venus, Saturn; enemies are Mars, Mercury. Head of the Dragon's friends are Jupiter and Venus; enemies are Saturn, Mars. Tail of the Dragon's friends are Saturn, Mars; enemies are Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Venus. Enemies by reason of opposite houses. Enemies by reason of opposite exaltations. Friends by reason of agreement in nature, quality, substance, and power. End of the third difference.

[Eclipse Effects and Planetary Stations]
DIFFERENCE & places of effects collected from the defects of the luminaries of the Sun. However, in another circumstance, that is, in the judgment of places, besides the Eclipse, it seems to take the stations and heliacal risings of the three superior planets, and indeed at least those which fall into the time of the Eclipse, and of those planets which preside over the defect. This seems to be able to be elicited from his own words: “The first chapter of this prediction contains the foreknowledge of places and cities, to which, besides or particularly, both the defects of the luminaries and the concurrent monthly constitutions of the wandering stars, such as exist in stationary Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, bring significations of events.” From this it seems to follow that places subject to future events are to be found from the dodecatemoria containing the defects, and also from the stations of the three superior planets when they preside over the defective places, that is, when they are lords of the place of defect or placed in the place of the Eclipse, or aspect it, or finally ascend the horizon at the hour of the Eclipse. But neither is this a sufficiently firm consequence deduced from Ptolemy's words: For the causes of great events are to be taken both from defective places and from the stations and risings of the wandering stars, it follows that both of these indicate to us places subject to such effects. And what is more, Ptolemy, in the consideration of the regions to which the effects pertain, expressly makes no mention of the wandering stars, and accommodates the significations of defects at least to those places which are coupled with the defective dodecatemorion. Hence it is clear that, when we think that places, which by sympathy or affinity of the dodecatemoria containing the stars dominating the defect, are in some part subject to the significations of the Eclipse, he either completely disregarded them, or at least insinuated them to us in passing. As for the words, “τὰς ἔμμένους στάσεις” we believe to mean the same as the Latin “menstruas constitutiones”. There are those who read “ἐπιμένεις στάσεις”. Both readings proceed well. For monthly stations are long-lasting, and familiar to the three superior planets, and alien to the inferior ones, who, since they scarcely consist due to the swiftness of their motion, are very far from menstruation. However, that the times of great events are not to be calculated from the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, but rather from the defects, can be established from this, that the effects of the former, extended to very long times, must be changed and varied almost infinitely by the transits of so many of them and other stars through different regions of the sky. But the decrees of these, since they can never exceed two and a half years, remain simpler, and usually expire before the heavier planets significantly change their places in the sky. Moreover, Ptolemy in this matter considers not the inherent power of the three superior planets, but that which is derived from the defects and brought to effect. For he says that the “κατὰ καιρὸν ἐμμήνους στάσεις” of the wandering stars, that is, the concurrent monthly constitutions, are to be observed. And if you wish to pursue the conjunctions of the heavier planets in the same way that Ptolemy treats the defects of the luminaries, the very difficulty of the matter, since the human intellect cannot comprehend the exact time of the conjunction of the superior planets, will easily repel you from your purpose. For even if they move with the swiftest motion they can have, it has already been shown by experts that Jupiter departing from Saturn never exceeds a difference of six first scruples in diurnal motion. Since this distance is smaller than can be detected by calculation or any instrument, such a conjunction will be so far from a certain hour and figure of the sky that not even its day can be considered certain. When the doctors of great conjunctions noticed this, they were therefore forced to devise another remedy for this ailment, which the author mentions in this place. For when the ascendants of great conjunctions are named, they mean those signs which the Sun, having reached the vernal intersection, or as they say, entering the beginning of Aries, and that in that year in which that conjunction is to occur, is observed ascending. For example: In the year of Christ our Lord 1563, a great conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn will be celebrated, and according to the calculation of the Alphonsine tables, on the 26th day of September, around 6 hours after noon, in the 4th part, 8th scruple, 1st degree of Leo; but according to the Prutenic calculation, on the 25th day of August, around the tenth hour after noon, in the 29th part of Cancer. Furthermore, the horoscoping part in the annual revolution, or as they call it, the part at the moment of time, when the Sun reaches the first point of Aries in that year, the ascendant, will be, according to their calculation, the 16th part of Sagittarius. For this reason, Sagittarius will be called the ascendant of that great conjunction by them, although there is a similar uncertainty about the ascending sign of the annual revolution, and no less disagreement in calculations. But it is also established by many arguments that this has no semblance of truth and is completely empty and without reason. For the beginning of the natural year, which is certainly accommodated to the Sun's entry into the beginning of Aries, is simply uncertain. For although it is consistent with truth that the Sun's return to the cardinal points of the zodiac constitutes the beginning of the natural year, nevertheless it brings with it no small hesitation as to which of these should be used as the primary principle, especially since each of these parts has something excellent, why it seems to claim the beginning of the year or the new moon by right for itself. Hence it happened that of those who commented on these matters, one established one beginning of the year, another another, as each was impelled by reasons or his own nature to establish this or that. Ptolemy also, since he could not resolve this hesitation, therefore transferred the discussion of the causes making the variety of individual years, not to one, but to all four, so that the vernal equinox varies spring, the summer solstice summer, the autumnal equinox autumn, the winter solstice winter. Therefore, since all doubt about the beginning of the natural year, how can we be certain about the sign ascending at its beginning? Finally, even if the Sun's return to the vernal intersection made the new moon of that year, nevertheless the signs ascending at the Sun's return to that beginning would still escape us, because that time can hardly be calculated so exactly as to serve the perfection or structure of the celestial theme without gross error. And this is the reason why Ptolemy prescribes to consider for the change of the four seasons of the year, not the Sun's return to the cardinal points, but rather the conjunctions or oppositions of the luminaries immediately preceding the Sun's entry into the cardinal points: whose times, since they can be calculated most exquisitely, provide us with the most perfect fabric of the celestial theme.

[The Vanity of Vulgar Astrologers]
Since these things are so, the vanity of those men of our time who compile vulgar calendars is manifest. Neglecting true doctrine, they babble publicly about floods in regions, destruction of cities, wars, famine, earthquakes, sterility, and such public calamities, solely from the Sun's passage to the vernal intersection. They fill the world with their lies and mere trifles, and render this most excellent profession infamous, bringing great opprobrium even upon those who care for truth. But they proceed to even greater folly or impudence when they attempt to strengthen their prophecies, as if they had not woven a fabulous history of the future without cause, by means of the annual progressions of great conjunctions, described a little below even by Alcabitius, or by the change of some great orb, no more certain than Plato's great year existing in the true nature of things. Therefore, either no, or a more learned, conjecture about the causes producing these greater effects in the world could not undeservedly be desired in republics. This is that which penetrates through all media from the first and most powerful natural causes to the most proper or particular. It is not, as we said a little earlier concerning Ptolemy's opinion, a prior or more potent cause of such events than that which is derived from the defective conjunctions of the luminaries. This is followed by the method by which the general constitution of each quadrant of the year is derived through the syzygies of the luminaries preceding the Sun's passage into the cardinal points. From this, the annual ephemeris, that is, the monthly method, by which the future constitutions of individual months of the year are produced, must be considered. Then follows the consideration of certain more subtle significations pertaining to the quadrants of each month. Inferior to these is the method by which we are taught to gather the quality of the air on any given day from the rising and setting of illustrious stars. The last place is held by the method which, through each hour of the day, hunts for the quality of the air's constitutions from the passage of the luminaries through the cardines. This is Ptolemy's method of conjecturing about the constitutions of the air, translated from the greatest to the least, which requires both more labor and far greater skill and erudition in things than is contained in all our calendar makers combined into one mass.

[Ascendant Correction from Adverse Events]
Next, calculate the years since birth during which adverse bodily events occurred. Having found these in the Ephemeris, if any misfortunes, such as bodily ailments, occurred on a certain day when the native's body or a malefic ray struck the ascendant degree itself or near it, these will prove the true ascendant of the nativity. Observe diligently that Saturn, passing through the ascendant with its body or malefic ray, causes melancholic infirmities of both mind and body, while Mars causes anger of the soul, wounds, burns, and similar Martial infirmities. Similarly, the transits of the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the geniture through the bodies and noxious rays of malefics must be attended to. Since such accidents occur not only through transits over the ascendant but also through other progressions of the Apheta to anaretic parts, for this reason, in the second place, it teaches how to find the true ascendant from such effects by means of profections, in this manner: See whether the annual profection of the ascendant, about which more below, can reach the bodies or noxious rays of malefics. If so, calculate the mean days between the day of birth and the day of the accident, and multiply them by six, so that the sixths of the days emerge, which, divided by 73 sixths of days (for 73 sixths of days make one degree in annual profections, when they progress by 30 degrees per 365 days), will yield the remaining degrees and minutes. If you subtract these from the place of the promissor of the accident, you will obtain the true degree and minute of the ascendant. For greater clarity, let's take an example. Schonerus was born in the year 1477, on January 16th, at 11 hours after noon, in latitude 50 degrees. In his 58th year, on the first day of January, he writes that he fell from a height, the cause of which was retrograde Saturn in 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio in the tenth house. Through this significant fall, he thus examined the ascendant degree in his geniture. He first noted that in that year, the annual profection of the ascendant had reached 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio, and before the completion of the year, it had reached 21 degrees 42 minutes of Scorpio, where Saturn was in the radix. He counted 349 days from the nativity to the time of the accident, that is, the first of January, which, multiplied by 6, yielded 2094 days. These, divided by 73 days, yielded 28 degrees 40 minutes, which he then subtracted from the place of the promissor, that is, Saturn, which was 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio, and there remained 21 degrees 42 minutes of Scorpio, which are almost the degrees of the true ascendant, namely Libra, which ascends in Schonerus's geniture, as follows: 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio. 1477. January 16th: 11 hours. Plus 30 degrees. 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio. Finally, by directions of the ascendant to unfortunate parts, the ascendant degree is to be proceeded with thus: From the oblique ascension of the promissor of the accident for the given latitude of the region, subtract the degrees and minutes due to the completed years and days from birth up to the year and day of the accident (for each year makes one degree, and six days make one minute in primary directions, as will be explained below). What remains will be the oblique ascension of the ascendant of the same region, which, if you put it into the table of oblique ascensions, you will obtain the true horoscoping degree. The same Schonerus narrates that when he was 40 years old, with 192 days completed, he was afflicted with scabies, ulcers, and various melancholic disturbances, which are manifest effects of Saturn. Therefore, by diligent calculation, it was found that around these days, the direction of the ascendant applied to the square of Saturn, falling in 20 degrees 32 minutes of Scorpio, and inflicted such evils on his body. Knowing these things beforehand, it is not difficult to obtain the true ascendant degree by backward calculation. For if from the oblique ascension of the said square aspect of Saturn, which is 250 degrees 46 minutes, you subtract 40 degrees 32 minutes, which correspond to 40 years and 192 days, there remains the oblique ascension of the true ascendant, namely 210 degrees 14 minutes, to which, in the table of ascensions constructed for latitude 50 degrees, corresponds approximately 21 degrees 40 minutes of Scorpio as the true ascendant of the nativity. Nor indeed are the other significators and promissors with their accidents to be treated differently, so that they may yield the truly horoscoping part. The third method of finding the true ascendant is Ptolemy's, which the author calls Annimodar, that is, which is taken from the dominion of the conjunction or opposition, which they call prevention, immediately preceding the nativity, and is explained here by the author. Here, however, before explaining the method of operation, he raises a very difficult question for us, namely, whether the number of degrees that the planet ruling in the place of the luminaries has made in the sign can truly show the ascendant degree. For if this method, by which the ascendant degree is said to be found by numbers, is universally true when it agrees with the ascendant degree taken by the Astrolabe, why is there a need for observation by the astrolabe or other examinations? But if these two do not generally agree, and yet both are to be trusted, it seems to follow that the birth of a human has two ascendants and twin decrees of the stars, differing in kind, quality, magnitude, and time, which cannot be. Before answering this hesitation, it must first be judged what the principle of human nature is. For man is not born in one moment, as many have thought, but first, turning in the womb, he breaks the cotyledons and the chorion, that is, the membrane in which the infant is enveloped, commonly called the secundine, and opens it. Then, if he is born naturally, he first comes out headfirst, then the middle, and finally the whole. Finally, the umbilical cord is cut or broken during birth, all of which actions from beginning to end never conclude in less than three hours; often, one and sometimes three days are involved. Now, therefore, will all these have force, or only one? If all, we will have nothing certain; if only one, it can rightly be doubted whence it should be taken. For when the head emerges, he is not yet born, and for the whole to emerge seems more voluntary than natural; indeed, it depends on the will of the midwife. Finally, the space from the emergence of the head to the emergence of the whole is too long to be considered the beginning. But here, according to Cardano's opinion, we must respond that the time in which an infant is produced is not a moment, but just as in the art of healing diseases and in all other human cases there is a certain known latitude, so also the nativity has some delay, distinguished by three principal moments, namely, access, consistency, and end, in which whole space the infant receives power from the stars, it must be believed. Access is the first principle, Consistency the second, which, since it is unequally distant from the extremes, and sometimes approaches very close to the end or the beginning, cannot properly be called the middle. The third moment is the end of the whole nativity. But these principles are to be taken from the infant's principal action, namely, respiration, so that the beginning of birth is established when the infant begins to breathe. The middle and principal beginning is when he has breathed so that he can live by himself. The end is when he has already drawn in so much air that he spontaneously ceases to breathe and the umbilical arteries move. Therefore, each principle acquires the powers of the whole nativity, but not equally, but so that each part has its own signification, and the beginning signifies about the beginning, the middle about the middle, and finally the end about the end. These things thus explained and understood, the answer to the question proposed at the beginning will also be clear, namely, that the time which must be taken by the astrolabe is that time which we have said to be principal and almost middle. But the time which the author and Ptolemy teach to find by numbers sometimes coincides with this principal time, from which the most true prognostics of astrologers are taken; sometimes, however, it coincides with the beginning by which wills and the beginnings of things are signified, which usually follows the effects; sometimes, finally, it falls into the end of the nativity, from which the quality of the end of the matter is gathered. And this is what the author says, that by Annimodar the true ascendant degree is not always found, but the most dignified of all degrees of the circle after the ascendant degree at the same hour according to the course of nature.

[Two Corollaries from Cardano]
It is better and safer to note the principal beginning by astrolabe, but since this is often not available, the natural beginning of the princes must be taken by Annimodar, which, although sometimes imperfect, yet, as has been shown, always exists as part of the whole nativity and can never be idle or useless, and is rightly assumed as the true beginning of the nativity. TWO COROLLARIES FROM THE SAME CARDANO. First, it follows from what has been said that those for whom the ascending number is similar to the number found by Ptolemy's method, or at least very close, as happened in the example we assumed, have very similar and conforming beginnings, middles, and ends: but for those where the true ascendant differs greatly from the ascendant sought by Annimodar, their beginnings, middles, and ends will be very dissimilar, especially if they differ greatly. For such people will sometimes suddenly fall from the summit to the lowest depths of the same thing, and conversely, sometimes, having been plunged into the depths and deprived of all hope, they will suddenly emerge as if aided by divine power, contrary to all expectation. Secondly, it is clear that, according to the opinion of Ptolemy and the author who described this passage from Ptolemy, both beginnings must be considered, the one found by the astrolabe and the natural one. For even if you cannot have the true beginning by astrolabe, you can nevertheless find it by the consensus of many progressions, which you will find true by experience, as we showed above. But now it is time to explain the ephod itself, which depends entirely on the syzygies of the luminaries immediately preceding the geniture. If the conjunction of the luminaries immediately preceded the geniture, no one fails to see by what degree one should operate. But if the opposition of the luminaries immediately preceded the nativity, there, because the luminaries hold opposite degrees, it can be doubted which degree, whether of the Sun or the Moon, is the place of prevention. To this hesitation, the author, according to Ptolemy's opinion, responds that the degree of that luminary which was above the earth at the time of the opposition has greater prerogative. But if one luminary touches the eastern horizon and the other the western cardinal point, then he says that the degree in the east is to be preferred to the western degree. Ptolemy's words on this matter are these: We must take the syzygy that immediately preceded the geniture, whether it was a conjunction or a full moon; and having accurately determined the degree, in the case of a conjunction, of both luminaries, but in the case of a full moon, of that one which was above the earth, we must consider the stars that exercise dominion over that part, which consists in these five: namely, the trigon, domicile, exaltation, term, and irradiation or configuration, that is, when one or more of these, or even all, are held by that place with respect to the ruling star. Therefore, if we find one star suitably disposed to all or most of these, then, having accurately noted the part which it occupies at the time of the geniture, in the sign in which it dwells, we shall judge a part similar in number to it to rise in that sign whose parts, by computation or by the calculation of ascensions, are found to be most similar to the part of the ruler. But if we find two or more aspiring to the principality of dominion, whose part at the time of the geniture was more similar, or rather closer in number, to the part ascending according to the rule of ascensions, we shall use the number of its parts. But if two or more agree in that proximity of number, then we shall follow the one who agrees more with both the angles and the condition of the time. But indeed, where the difference of the parts of this dominion, with respect to the horoscope placed at the estimated time, is greater than with respect to the culmination of the heavens, then, using that very same number of parts to constitute the culminating part, we shall constitute the remaining cardinal points according to its guidance. The meaning of this passage, therefore, is this: If, having erected the figure of the heavens for the estimated time (which is when they think the child was born, if it was not observed by very accurate instruments), you have already certainly known which sign (for unless the sign is certain, this rule could easily lead you into gross error) touched the eastern horizon at the hour of birth, and you have at least hesitated about the horoscoping degree, and wish to be more certain about it: Then, he says, if the conjunction immediately preceded the hour of birth, diligently see which among the planets in the place of conjunction had more and greater prerogatives, which, according to Ptolemy's opinion, as appeared, are contained in the trigon, domicile, exaltation, term, and irradiation or configuration, that is, irradiation or configuration, and most diligently seek out its true motion for the estimated time of birth: having done this, look at the theme of the heavens conformed to the estimated hour of birth, and consider whether the place of the ruler of the interlunium is more similar or closer in number, that is, according to the quantity of the disjunction or arithmetic, to the horoscoping degree or to the midheaven. For if it is closer to the eastern cardinal point, that part of the rising sign is to be advanced into the horoscope which agrees with the degrees and parts measured by the ruling planet of the interlunium in its sign. But if the same ruling planet is closer to the midheaven, so many parts of the sign dwelling there are to be placed in the culmination of the heavens, and then the remaining places are to be conformed to the true position of either the horoscope or the midheaven, in the manner which I will explain a little below. Nor indeed is the horoscope of the preventional genitures, as they call them, examined otherwise, by the degree of the luminary dwelling in the upper hemisphere: therefore, we must now make the matter easier to understand by the calculation of examples. And so, to speak first of the geniture described by us as an example throughout this work, it is manifest that it followed the opposition of the luminaries, and indeed such an opposition in which the Moon was found above the earth, having recently entered the fourth part of Sagittarius, where Jupiter has the carpentum by reason of domicile, trigon, and terms. And since Jupiter at the time of the geniture was found in the 27th part of Gemini, which number, departing farthest from the culminating part, approaches closest to the number of the horoscoping parts, and on account of this indicates that the 27th part of Libra is to be advanced into the eastern horizon according to our rule, which plainly agrees with the ascendant of the time, whether it was observed by astrolabe or corrected in some other way. It is also consistent that the two more powerful rulers of the preceding conjunction of the luminaries, if they agree with one of the principal cusps, more effectively fulfill the intention of the rule. Here, however, as everywhere else, the more powerful one takes precedence, and especially if it also follows the condition of the time, as happens here, and the right of the trigon, which it exercises in the place of the conjunction of the luminaries, was heretical. The same effect is produced if two more powerful ones

[Determining the Ascendant and Midheaven]
The two rulers of the house, one of the cusp of the tenth house, the other of the first, agree. The evidence for this is clear in our example, if in the prevention you prefer the place of the Moon to the place of the Sun, or at least compare it simultaneously with the beginning of Gemini, which Saturn and Mercury, ruling with great power, seem to obstruct, so that the number of parts of the former agrees with the cusp of the first house, and that of the latter with the second. Another example concerns two aspirants to leadership: At some estimated time, let the 18th degree of Cancer culminate, and the 14th degree of Libra ascend, and let the conjunction of the luminaries immediately precede this nativity in the 10th degree of Libra, where Saturn, residing in the 15th degree of Capricorn, has the first prerogative. Venus, traversing the eleventh degree of Scorpio, has the second prerogative. For each of these two planets has a chariot in the said place of the preceding conjunction, Saturn indeed because of exaltation and trine, and because he illuminates the same place from the 15th degree of Capricorn with a square ray: Venus indeed because of house and bounds. But because she is very remote from the similarity of the number of angles, therefore Saturn is to be preferred to her, who is also more powerful than Venus, and has made the number of parts closer to the parts of the ascendant in his sign. Let the Midheaven again be in the 15th degree of Aquarius in the nativity, and the ascendant in the 7th degree of Gemini, and the place of the conjunction immediately preceding the nativity in the 22nd degree of Libra, in which, since the oriental Saturn, traversing the 13th degree of Virgo, has the first prerogative, and Mercury, traversing the 5th degree of Scorpio, has the second, it is clear that the number of Mercury approaches the number of the ascendant, and the number of Saturn approaches the number of the Midheaven equally: however, since Saturn is more powerful, both because of the prerogatives in the place of the immediately preceding conjunction, and because of the condition of the day, therefore the 15th degree of Aquarius should be promoted to the Midheaven rather than the 5th degree to the ascendant. The author seems to think that the proximity of the ruler to the angles should be taken according to continuous quantity. As if the ascendant of the estimated nativity is the 5th degree of Taurus, and the Midheaven the 4th degree of Capricorn, and the ruling planet is the Sun, passing through the 14th degree of Aries, then according to continuous quantity the Sun is closer to the Midheaven than to the ascendant, for the distance from Aries to Capricorn is greater than to Taurus, and therefore the 14th degree of Taurus should be promoted to the cusp of the Midheaven, and the other places conformed to the position of the same Midheaven. But discrete quantity pushes the 14th degree of Capricorn to the ascendant, because the number 14 is closer to 5 than to 4. But indeed, that this matter is to be understood of discrete and not continuous quantity, the very words of Ptolemy, recited by us a little earlier, speak openly. Another fourth method is commonly handed down for finding the ascendant degree by the duration of the native in the mother's womb, which they call the balance of Hermes. For Hermes, the most ancient writer on celestial matters, corrects the estimated times of nativities from the moment of the sperm's fall into the womb, and seeks the true rising degree, because that place of the sky, in which it is at the time of conception, falls into the rising angle at the time of birth. For he wanted the Moon to have such a conformity to the birth of man, that the place of the Moon at the fall of the sperm ascends at the time of birth, and vice versa, the place of the Moon at the time of birth, if it is the ascendant of the fall of the sperm into the womb: so if it was in the 3rd degree of Taurus when the woman conceived the fetus, he supposes the same degree to rise when she gives birth. Again, if at the time of conception the first degree of Scorpio emerges, the child will not be born unless the Moon comes to the first part of the same. Sometimes, however, he stated that not the same sign, but the opposite, ascends, which they want to be true when at the time of coitus it is found in the western angle. His words are these: “In what sign is the nativity at the time of conception, make that the ascendant; and in what sign it was found at conception, make that or its opposite the ascendant at birth.” This aphorism being posited and conceded, by the altitude which the Moon has at the time of birth in our hemisphere, they find the rising degree at the time of someone's birth in this way: First, construct the celestial chart, and find the true place of the Moon for the time when they estimate the infant to have been born. Second, find the distance of the Moon from the ascendant or the western angle: from the ascendant if it is below the earth, but from the seventh if it is above the earth. You will calculate such a distance in this way: Subtract the signs and parts of the angle from the signs and parts of the Moon, adjusted, as astronomical calculation requires, by a full revolution, as often as the lower cannot be subtracted from the higher: this done, the removal of the Moon from the angle will remain. Third, seek the found removal of the Moon from the angle in the table of the duration of the fetus in the mother's womb, and you will find the days of duration in the first series of numbers, if the Moon was below the earth at the time of birth; but in the latter, if it was in the upper hemisphere. Fourth, to have the found time of conception, count back the found duration from the time of birth, or, which is the same, subtract it from the time of birth, which is intercepted between the beginning of the Roman year and the point of birth, adjusted by a full revolution of the preceding year, if subtraction cannot be done, diligently observing the bissextile year in both cases, and the number of days of conception of the same or the preceding year will remain, when namely you have adjusted one period of the preceding year, whether common or bissextile. As in our example, the Moon's motion is 10 signs, 27 degrees, 52 minutes, 11 seconds, and the ascendant is 6 signs, 26 degrees, 44 minutes, 1 second. Subtracting these from the Moon's motion, the Moon's distance from the ascendant remains, namely 4 signs, 1 degree, 8 minutes, 1 second, to which in the first series of the table correspond 283 days, during which the native was detained in the mother's womb. However, since from the beginning of the year 1127, at least 1417 days have elapsed until the time of birth, which are fewer than to allow subtraction of the days of duration in the womb, therefore I will add to them a full revolution of the preceding and common year, that is, 365 days, and I will produce a sum of 5064 days, from which, subtracting the 283 days of duration in the womb, 223 days remain. With these, to recognize the day of the month of the preceding year, enter the table of months of the common year, in which opposite July, 212 days, the next smaller number, will present themselves. Subtract these from 223 days, and 11 days will remain. Therefore, the estimated day of conception according to this method is found to be the twelfth of August, at the end of which the Moon traversed the 20th degree, 16 minutes, 1 second of Libra, as the Ephemerides tables show you. TABLE OF THE DURATION OF THE FETUS IN THE MOTHER'S WOMB. TABLE OF USUAL MONTHS. Signs. Parts. Days. Days. January 31. 31. 0.0.273. 258. February 59. 60. 0.1.274. 259. March 90. 91. 0.2.275. 260. April 120. 121. 0.16.276. 261. May 151. 152. 1.18.277. 262. June 181. 182. 2.0.278. 263. July 212. 213. 2.12.279. 264. August 243. 244. 2.24.280. 265. September 273. 274. 3.6.281. 266. October 304. 305. 3.18.282. 267. November 334. 335. 4.0.283. 268. December 365. 366. 4.12.284. 269. Year. Common. Bissextile. 4.24.285. 270. 5.6.286. 271. 5.18.287. 272. 5.29.288. 273. Greater. Middle. Below earth from ascendant. Above earth from seventh. Whether the found day is the true day of conception or not? If on the estimated day of conception you find the Moon's place in the sign, at the time when the infant is said to have been born, rising, as happened in our example, or even in its opposite, know that you have reached the true goal with a certain calculation. For, as was said a little earlier, in what sign it was found at conception, that same or its opposite ascends at birth. But if the Moon was absent from the said signs by a two-day motion or less, its motion for the next following days must be taken: And conversely, if the Moon exceeded the same places, the Moon's motion of the preceding days must be observed until the Moon's place reaches the next smaller place of the angle: for thus it will happen that the true nativity, as is consistent with reason, always...

[Moon in Sun's Rays]
And if the Moon is in these places under the Sun's rays, it will not be suitable as Hyleg. You will look for the Hyleg in the angles and their succedent houses, according to how the twelve houses of the circle are equalized by the degrees of the ascending hours, as its operation is explained in the canon of the planets, that is, in the book of the courses of the planets. And when you have equalized the houses in this way: every planet that is five degrees or less before the degree of the ascending sign, or of any house, its strength will be valid in the house that succeeds it. And every place among the places we have mentioned is suitable for Hyleg: if any of its lords, who is the lord of the house, or the lord of its exaltation, or the lord of its terms, or of its triplicity, or the lord of its face, aspects it; and if not, it will not be suitable for Hyleg. Regarding Alcochoden. And from this Alcochoden, who is the significator of life, that is, the giver of years or the lesser giver of years: when you wish to know him, and when you have known the Hyleg in the order I have described, you will look at the lord of the Hyleg's house, or the lord of its exaltation, or the lord of its term, or the lord of its triplicity, or of its face, which of these is stronger and more authoritative in the place of the Hyleg: and if he aspects the Hyleg, he will be more worthy of being Alcochoden: but if he does not aspect the Hyleg, whoever has more authority: you will look at the one with less authority, until you find one of them who aspects it: but if he does not aspect the Hyleg, that place will not be able to be the Hyleg. And you will seek another Hyleg, and again you will seek the Alcochoden from the same second Hyleg in the order we have described: but if two planets are equal in authority to the degree of the Hyleg, and aspect the Hyleg, the one who is stronger in place will be more worthy of being Alcochoden. But if they are equal in strength of place, that is, where the planets themselves are, the one who is closer to the degree of the Hyleg will be the Alcochoden. To some, it seemed better to look at the lord of the house: if he aspected the Hyleg, they would make him Alcochoden, and would not consider another: and if they did not find the lord of the house aspecting the Hyleg, they would take the lord of the exaltation: if they saw him aspecting the Hyleg, they would make him Alcochoden, and would not consider another: and similarly they would do with the lord of the triplicity, terms, and face in order: and Dorotheus preferred the lord of the term over the lord of the house in this matter: And some said that if two planets, or three, or more, are equal in dignity, and in proximity of aspect to the degree of the Hyleg, the one who is in a laudable place from the Sun will be the Alcochoden: that is, the one who is with the Sun in one degree by sixteen minutes, or less: or closer to the degree of the angle: or in the beginnings of its rising, that is, when it appears in the morning: or is in its second station; or is in some laudable state from the Sun, as we have said, he will be the Alcochoden. But if the degree of the Sun is in the Hyleg, and it is in Aries or Leo, the Sun will be Hyleg and Alcochoden together: and no other Alcochoden will be considered besides it. Similarly, if the degree of the Moon is Hyleg and it is in Taurus or Cancer, you will take it as Hyleg and Alcochoden together, and you will not consider any other Alcochoden besides it. Almut is he who presides over the nativity: from him is signified the being born after the Hyleg and Alcochoden, and he is of greater authority than the other planets, in the ascendant and in the places of the luminaries and in the place of the Part of Fortune, and also in the place of conjunction or prevention, which is before the nativity. But if any planet presides over two places or three, or four, or more by the multitude of its power, it will be the Almut, that is, the author and significator of life after the Hyleg and Alcochoden, and through him is signified the being born. And some consider him as Alcochoden for giving life. The following two chapters pertain to the greatest and principal astrological question, by which the lifespan of the native is explained. And although, according to Ptolemy, the explanation of this question is not simple or easy, nor is it easy, and finally it requires great labor and uncommon prudence to see when the power of the giver of life is extinguished, and which star is the destroyer of life or the killer of the native, to perceive: Nevertheless, the precepts taught here are neither so obscure nor difficult, and are concluded in three principal places. For this treatise depends entirely on the apprehension of the Aphetic places, and the stars ruling them, and finally the stars and places that destroy. One of these, and how each is to be judged from the tradition of Ptolemy, I will first indicate chapter by chapter, and afterwards I will add the opinion of the author and other Arabs. Regarding Aphetic places. Concerning these, Ptolemy says thus: Aphetic places are those in which it is absolutely necessary for him to be found who wishes to obtain jurisdiction over the moderation of life. He enumerates, just as he does prorogators, so also the places in which prorogators, when placed, determine life, five, whose series is this: The first place, and which is preferred to the others in power and authority here, is the Midheaven. The second, and first in proximity of power, is the Ascendant. The third is the eleventh house, the Good Spirit. The fourth is the seventh house. The fifth, and weaker than the others, is the ninth house, God. The remaining seven houses are useless. For first, Ptolemy rightly teaches that everything that is subterranean is to be postponed in this excellent kind of dominion, with the sole exception that when it comes to light with the horoscope, that is, the 25 degrees that follow the eastern cardinal point. Then, from those places that are above ground, it is not appropriate to accept the eighth place, called idle, which is not connected to the ascendant by any bond of familiarity, nor the twelfth, which is called the place of the evil daemon. For besides being cast down from the angle, and being smoky and dark to the horoscope, born from earthly vapors, it disturbs and as it were abolishes the efflux of the stars dwelling there; for which reason they do not appear in their colors or magnitudes. But the places which he posits as Aphetic, all except the 25 parts succeeding the center of the east, are above ground, and to the horoscope in the equinoctial, the eleventh is configured by a sextile, the tenth by a square, the ninth by a trine, and the seventh by an opposite aspect. Finally, it must be diligently observed here that each place comprises thirty equinoctial parts, of which five precede the cusp, and 25 succeeding ones follow it. Therefore, although the eleventh place extends up to the twelfth by 30 degrees of the equinoctial: nevertheless, those last five degrees of the eleventh, although they are not entirely devoid of virtue, do not have the power to make a star dwelling there the lord of life. But when a suitable place succeeds a suitable place, then those last five degrees are not removed, because although they are not good by reason of the place of which they are a part, nevertheless they are considered suitable by reason of the succeeding place. As the last 5 parts of the ninth place, although they are good by reason of the proper place, they are not.

[Aphetic Places and Alcocoden]
They also say that the Moon opposing the Ascendant kills, especially if it has dignity in the eighth house. This is Ptolemy's opinion on this matter. It remains for us to briefly depict, as if in a table, which authors teach us to choose the significators of life from the opinions of others. In diurnal nativities, look within 5 degrees that have risen above the horizon at the end of the twelfth house. First, in the tenth, which, if it is in the eleventh, if it is in the seventh, eighth, ninth. Ascendant, second, third, seventh. Second, look within 5 degrees that have risen above the horizon, which, if it is in the tenth, in the eleventh, in the fourth, fifth, in any masculine sign, the Sun will be there. If the Moon is in any feminine sign only, within 5 degrees preceding the cusp of the seventh. In nocturnal nativities, look within 5 degrees that have risen above the horizon. First, in the tenth, which, if it is in the eleventh, if it is in the seventh, in the eighth, in the ninth. In its masculine sign, the Moon will be there, only if it is masculine. Second, within 5 degrees before the cusp of the seventh house, below the earth, in any sign, the Sun, which, if it is in the fifth, will be there. In the Ascendant, in a masculine sign, in the second. If neither luminary is found suitable for the Hyleg, and the degree of conjunction precedes the nativity and is in an angle or succedent house. Opposition of the opposition: If these places are not found suitable enough for the Hyleg, then the Part of Fortune will moderate life, if it is found in angles or succedent houses; if not, the degree of the Horoscopus will prolong life. But the types of signs are not to be considered here, but only in the luminaries. According to this reasoning, the Sun has six Aphetic places above the earth, namely, 5 degrees above the horizon, the tenth, eleventh, seventh, eighth, and ninth. Below the earth, five: namely, five degrees before the seventh, the fourth, fifth, the Horoscopus, and the second house. The Moon, however, has five Aphetic places above the earth: namely, five degrees preceding the Horoscopus, the tenth, eleventh, seventh, and eighth. Below the earth, six: namely, the Ascendant, the second house, the third, fourth, fifth, and five degrees preceding the cusp of the west. First caution: A combust Moon cannot be a Hyleg; indeed, no combust planet can be a significator of life. Concerning the arcs of emergence and occultation, within which stars oppressed by the Sun's rays are combust, enough has been said above. You will also look at the Hyleg, etc. Second caution, how this is to be understood can be seen from what we have said above concerning the distribution of the 12 houses according to the opinion of John of Regiomontanus and others. Third caution, which also agrees with Ptolemy's doctrine, but in Ptolemy, one house extends over a space of 30 parts of the equinoctial circle, of which five before the cusp of the house and twenty-five immediately following obtain the virtue of one house. But the author seems to be speaking of parts of the zodiac. Fourth caution, which dissents from Ptolemy's doctrine. No Hyleg can be assigned unless the Alcocoden also concurs, that is, the planet that rules in the place of the Hyleg and aspects it with some aspect. For whatever planet has the greater prerogative in the place of the Hyleg and aspects that same place, they call it the Alcocoden. If it happens that several attest at the same time, the one superior in both aspect and dignity is to be preferred: for he who has more dignities and is closer to it in degrees will be the Alcocoden. Finally, if the Apheta is in its own domicile or exaltation, then it will be both Hyleg and Alcocoden, when, that is, it has no aspecting planet from the lords of essential dignities. The Arabs derive conjectures about the longevity or brevity of life from the Alcocoden. For the Alcocoden found in an angle is said to signify its greater years, in a succedent house, its middle years, in a cadent house, its lesser years. I will not adduce any examples of this, because it is clear enough by itself, and because these conjectures are very weak and dissent from Ptolemy's doctrine, nor do they seem to present any physical reason. Indeed, if the lord of the place powerfully aspects the place itself, and especially with a good aspect, it renders the Apheta stronger, and thereby provides a stronger and longer life to the native, as Ptolemy testifies, who taught that in Aphetic and killing places, with what suffrages they are supported, must be diligently weighed. Therefore, a planet friendly to the Aphetic sign, if it shines upon the Apheta with its ray, although it adds much strength to it, so that it does not succumb for a slight cause, and that it may more easily overcome the Aneratas that oppose it: nevertheless, it will hardly be able to indicate a certain number of years of life, which must be sought with greater industry and labor, without the grossest errors. The Arabs call the Victor or Lord of the nativity the Almuten of the nativity, the Greeks κύριος γενέσεως: it is the planet that obtains more and better prerogatives in the five Aphetic places, namely, the place of the Sun, the place of the Moon, the place of the eastern angle, the place of the Part of Fortune, and the place of the luminaries closest to the nativity. Therefore, whichever of the planets obtains the greater and more powerful abundance of suffrages in the said places, that one will obtain the lordship of the nativity. By suffrages here we understand the rulership of the house, exaltation, trigon, and terms. Finally, conjunction and any other aspect, indeed, even ruling and commanding. Julius Firmicus, in Book 4, Chapter 12, believes that the lord of the nativity is the one whose sign the Moon will first enter after the person is born. For example, if someone had the Moon in Aries at the first hour of birth, because the Moon makes its transit to Taurus in the second place, it will obtain the lordship of the nativity, because it is the sign of Taurus, and so in the other signs. In this way, it must be observed that neither the Sun nor the Moon can be made lords in any nativity. Therefore, if the Moon is found in Taurus on the day a person is born, then neither in Taurus, that is, in its own house, nor in the house of the Sun, will it signify the lord of the nativity: but when it has passed these signs and come to another sign, then it will indicate the lord of the nativity. Because Taurus is the house of Venus, Venus will be made the lord of the nativity. However, just as many other precepts of Firmicus, so also this one dissents from the true doctrine of Ptolemy, even if it seems to have some similarity with Ptolemy's rule, by which he teaches to observe the place of the planet or the ray upon which the significator first fell by diurnal motion, as we will see below. But this is another reason. Concerning the profection of signs. And from this, the sign of profection in the years of nativities and of the world. For in the years of nativities, the knowledge is to look at how many years have passed for the native from the perfect solar years, and you will look at one sign each year, starting from the Ascendant of the native by the succession of signs, until the number is finished. The sign that succeeds is the sign of profection from the Ascendant, namely, the sign of the entered year, which you have not included in the number. This will be in the same degree as it was in the Ascendant of the nativity: and its lord is called the Alcochoden, whose interpretation is the lord of the year. Similarly, you will count from the sign of the Sun one sign for each year, and from this will come the sign of profection from the Sun. Similarly, from the sign of the Moon and from the Midheaven, from the Part of Fortune in the likeness of the degree of the radix, that is, the point of nativity. An example of this is that someone was born with Capricorn rising, namely, in its 17th degree: the Sun was in Pisces in the 15th degree: and the Midheaven was in Scorpio in the 8th degree. The Moon was in Libra in the 15th degree, and the Part of Fortune in Leo in the 17th degree. And now three perfect years have passed for the native, and the fourth year will arrive from the Ascendant in Aries, which is the fourth from Capricorn up to the 17th degree of that same Aries, and Mars will be the Alcochoden: the place of the Sun arrives at Gemini up to the 15th degree of that same sign: and the Moon arrives at Capricorn at the 15th degree. The profection from the Midheaven arrives at the 8th degree of Aquarius, the profection from the Part of Fortune arrives at the 17th degree of Scorpio. And when the year arrives at the degree of profection, as at the 17th degree.

[Profection of the World's Years]
In this example of Aries: and if it were between the 393rd degree between itself and a similar degree of the succeeding sign, to which the following year ought to arrive, in the same house a planet or its rays: and you wish to know when the profection will reach that planet or its rays: you will look at what is between the degree to which the year will arrive, and the planet or its rays, in degrees and minutes: you will multiply that by 12. And the sixth part of that number, which you multiply, or in 12 degrees, 6 minutes of one degree, whatever results, will be the days of that year in which you are, in which the profection will arrive from the degree in which it begins, up to the degree to which you have counted, after which the profection of that planet will occur. Alchindus said that the profection from the years of the world is that which was between the year of the conjunction that signified the Saracen sect, and the year of Albegerat in which Muhammad first began to preach, which was the first of the Arab years, 52 years and 57 days: and the ascendant of that year of the conjunction of the aforesaid sect was the sign of Gemini: the profection of that same year arrived at Virgo, and between the first of the Arab years and the first of the years of King Iezdygird of the Persians, there were 3624 perfect days. Therefore, when you wish to have knowledge of this matter: take the years of Iezdygird, convert them into days, as has already been explained in the Azig, that is, in the book of the courses of the planets: add the days that are between the first of the Arab years and Iezdygird: then divide this by 365 days and a quarter of a day: as many divisions as come out, so many will be the Solar years: and what remains of months and days will be from the imperfect year: when this has been collected from the years, these are the Solar years from the beginning of the Arab years, therefore cast out one sign for each year and begin from Virgo, to whatever sign the number leads you, that will be the sign to which the year of the world arrives from the ascendant of the conjunction of the aforesaid sect. Others, however, outside of Alchindus, thought it right to add to the perfect years of Iezdygird 61 years, 2 months, 12 days, 16 hours, from the Persian years: which are without fraction, that is, without a quarter of a day, and they would extend these years into days, and convert the days into Solar years, as we have said, and begin to cast out from the beginning of Libra. But if you wish the profection from the sign of the conjunction of the sect, let the profection be from Scorpio: but if you wish the profection from the ascendant of the kingdom, subtract from the years of Iezdygird those 317 perfect years, and convert them into Solar years as we have said: and begin to cast out from Virgo. Again, if you wish the profection from the ascendant of the profection of the change of conjunction from the watery triplicity to the fiery triplicity, subtract from the perfect years of Iezdygird 176 years, and convert those that remain into Solar years, begin to cast out from Leo, and to whatever sign the number arrives, that will be the profection of each beginning of those things we have mentioned. And from this, the Aphetic places at the time of the origin of things, found in certain parts of the zodiac, do not remain fixed, but are moved annually, monthly, and daily by revolutions of 30 degrees of the zodiac into succeeding signs. The author here places two kinds of such progression of these places, commonly called profection. One is the profection of nativities, the other of the years of the world. For the annual profection of the five Aphetic places in the nativity of men is that in which generally for each Solar year, the space of one sign, that is, 30 parts, is allotted. The planet, however, which rules such a sign, they call the lord of the year or the annual Chronocrator. But if the aforesaid 30 parts are concluded by the boundaries of two distinct signs, as often happens, then also the annual dominion is distributed to different planets by parts of time. For example: If in someone's nativity 12 parts fall into the eastern angle, the first year will have the space of the zodiac which extends from the 12th part to the 12th part. And so for the first 7 months and 9 days, they will preside for 18 parts. The remainder of the year, that is, 4 months and 26 days, will be governed by and, which same planets will dispose of the first part of the following year, so that the dominion of the last part of the same following year devolves to the lord of Gemini. At the end of the third year, the profection will reach part 12, and its Chronocrator will be with 4: and so consequently according to the order of the succeeding signs, we will arrange the annual arbiters of times, up to the twelfth year, which being completed, in the thirteenth year the profection will return to the epoch or to the radical place, that is, to the degree of the eastern angle, and the lord and will return again, and will proceed in the same way: and in this manner, as has been said, each Aphetic place, traversing these places of the sky orbicularly to the end of life, will complete one period every twelfth year. Therefore, if you wish to know, after many years of a native's life have passed, what place the profection of the horoscope ambulates, divide the completed years of the native by 12, and extend the remaining number from the horoscope in the manner we have advised. For example, let a native live, whose horoscope was part 14, in the 40th year. Therefore, he will have 39 completed years, which divided by 12 leave 3 completed years, the first of which we assign to Leo, the second to, the third to, in the current year of the native's age, that is, in the 40th year of the native's age, we will understand the horoscope to have proceeded to part 14 of Scorpio, and we will constitute the lord of that sign, the chronocrator and the principal lord of such a year, until the same progression is introduced, which will happen after about 194 days of revolution: since the annual profection traverses 4 first scruples and besides 56 secondary scruples every day, then 4, the lord of Sagittarius, will succeed Mars in annual dominion. But these things which have been said about the profection of the horoscope, from whose application to the more benevolent or more malevolent radiations of the planets good or bad accidents in the native's body in that year are foreseen, are to be understood in exactly the same way and manner concerning the culminating degree for mastery, concerning the degree for dignity and honor, and concerning the remaining parts of the lots for other accidents. But all these things in nativities, which we wish to examine more accurately, it will be better to distribute by a table, which you will construct in this way. In the first series, place the years of the native from 1 to 12. In the second from 13 to 24. In the third from 25 to 36. In the fourth from 37 to 48. And so on up to the last years of the native's life. Afterwards, at the top of the years of age and in the first series, write the current years of Christ, which contain the beginning of the nativity, to which immediately add 12, and what arises from this, place at the top of the second series, or above the 13th year of age, and so on, adding 12 years, until the last series of the native's years of age is reached: this done, opposite the 1st year of age, the epoch of the horoscope is to be placed in the sign and degree, then the epoch of the Moon: third the epoch: fourth the epoch of the MC: fifth and last the epoch of the part of fortune. If these vertical signs are led down to the foot of the table according to their natural series, the table of annual profections will be completed, as can be seen in the assumed nativity, whose epochs and profections of the five Aphetic places we have here presented to you tabularly as an example. Years of Christ. 1327 1539 1951 1563 1575 1 13253749264427.52 214263850 315273951 Years of age. 416284052 0 5 17294153 618304254. X ☑子+horosc. D M.C. II 8.542 1.390515.42 X 6 up V 2 ४ m II S そ * 719314355 2 ++ 8 20324456 ४ עה 9213345 57 1Ⅱ ± 1022-344658 11223314759 2 ++ XY P I ४ ××花子さま horosc. 1224364860 * ४ I

[Direction of Significators in Quadrants]
If the significator is in one quadrant, and the place to which you direct it is in another quadrant, you will direct the significator to the succeeding angle. After this, you will direct from the angle to the place, just as I showed you the direction from the angle, and you will combine both directions.

[Calculating Direction in Years]
When you know the significator and wish to know where the direction from the circle of signs will arrive in a certain number of years: if the significator is in the ascendant: you will add the number of years to the ascensions of the degree of the ascendant: and you will make it an arc in the ascension of the region: and where the arc of degrees from the circle of signs comes out, there the direction will arrive in the same year. But if the significator is in the 7th house, you will add the number of years to the ascensions in the 7th house, you will add the number of years to the nadir of the degree of the significator: and you will arc it also in the ascensions of the region: and what comes out of the circle of signs, to its nadir the direction will arrive in the same year. But if the significator is in the 10th or 4th house, you will add to the ascensions of the degree of the significator in the direct circle the number of years: and you will arc it in the ascensions of the direct circle, and what comes out of the circle of signs, there the direction will arrive in the same year. But if the significator is outside these four places which are the angles: you will know the hours of longitude from the angle, as I said before: if the significator is in the eastern half: you will add to the ascensions of the degree of the significator through the direct circle the number of years you wish: and you will arc this in the ascensions of the direct circle, and what comes out, will be the significator of the direct circle, keep it. After this, you will also add the number of years to the ascensions of the degree of the significator in the region: you will arc this in the ascension of the region: and what it is, will be the significator of the region. After this, you will take the sixth part of the remainder between the significator of the direct circle and the significator of the region: and you will multiply it by the hours of longitude from the angle: what it is, will be the equation. But if the significator of the direct circle is less than the significator of the region: you will add the equation to the significator of the direct circle: if it is more, you will subtract it from it: and what remains, there the direction will arrive from the circle of signs in the same year. But if the significator is in the western half, you will make it the nadir of the degree of the significator, as you did with the degree of the significator in the work before it: and what it is, there the direction will arrive from the circle of signs in the same year.

[Locus Divisionis and Divisor]
And the place to which the direction arrives is called the place of division: the lord of the term of that place is called the divisor: if another planet or its rays or near the place before it is in the degree of division: this planet or the lord of the rays is said to be a participant of the divisor in the division.

[Five Significators for Direction]
The significators which are directed are five places, that is, the degree of the ascendant, and the degree of the Sun, the degree of the Moon, the degree of Apheta, also the Part of Fortune, and the degree of the Midheaven. The climacteric degree of the ascendant is directed to discern accidents, which happen to the body: and the degree of the Sun to causes of dignity and exaltation: also of honor and kingdom: the Moon for the essence of the soul and body and marriage, the Part of Fortune for acquisitions and the smallness or generosity of profits, and the Midheaven for mastery and other particular dispositions and their essence.

[Direction in Revolutions]
But if it is the ascendant of the revolution of any years of the world or nativities, its significators are directed according to this direction, namely, one day for each degree. Some think that the significators of the year are directed in this way, namely, for every 59 minutes and 8 seconds, one day: for the direction of kings and princes is directed to them from the degree of the Midheaven through the ascensions of the direct circle, for every 59 minutes and 8 seconds, one day, until it reaches good or bad planets. And the essence of kings in health or illness is directed from the degree of the ascendant to good or bad planets for every 59 minutes and 8 seconds, one day through the ascensions of the region. And the direction in the revolution of the years of the world and to predict the essence of the common people or rustics from the degree of the ascendant: similarly and to predict the essence of the king from the degree of the Midheaven, and in the revolution of the years of nativities to predict the essence of the native from the degree of the ascendant of the revolution, for every 59 minutes and 8 seconds through the ascensions of the region, one day.

[On Directions or Deductions of Significators]
And from this, to direct in Latin is what the Greeks call ευθύνομ, ἢ ἰθύνου το σκάλιους, which means: to correct what is crooked and make it straight: and a straight path is that which does not deviate into windings, but proceeds directly, and as the Greeks say, επ' ευθείας. Hence I believe it has been accepted that the reduction of the oblique and unequal ascensions of the zodiac to a regular and equal measure is called direction. For since in both the right and oblique sphere, the parts of the Ecliptic rise and set unequally, so that sometimes more, sometimes less time is consumed in ascending and descending, therefore this anomaly or unequal progression of the Ecliptic, sometimes proceeding obliquely, sometimes directly, must be corrected, and compared to the certain and regular motion of the equinoctial, which precisely raises and lowers 15 parts in every hour in every position of the sphere, so that the times of events, measured by the progression of the parts of the sky, can be certainly known. For when individual parts are said to announce individual years in this doctrine, this is not to be understood of the Ecliptic, as Albumasar thought, but of the parts of the equinoctial. For example, the sign of Leo almost consumes 2 hours, 49 minutes, and 14 seconds before it entirely ascends in Cologne. But Aquarius rises completely in 1 hour and 10 minutes and 14 seconds, so that no one fails to understand that the parts of Leo produce a longer tract than the parts of Aquarius. For the sign of Leo, in ascending, draws 42 parts, 23 minutes, and 14 seconds of the equinoctial in that place, while the sign of Aquarius draws only 17 parts, 25 minutes, and 14 seconds. Therefore, since in the Ecliptic the parts of one sign easily unify the length of the co-rising parts of the equinoctial, while those of another are further from the same (for individual degrees of Aquarius do not complete years, but each degree of Leo occupies more than one year), both must be examined to a uniform and equal measure of the equinoctial. Such a correction of oblique and unequal progression is commonly called direction, a term which Pontanus often rejects as inappropriate, and prescribes that it should be called ambulation or progression: the Greeks called it wίπαμ& ἄφεσι. Some want wίπα to be a generic term, signifying any progression of any place: ἄφεσιμ, however, is a specific kind of ambulation, which we are discussing here, by which the prorogator and lord of life, called Ilech in Arabic, or any other progressing significator, is led to opposing planets or their aspects by equinoctial or diurnal motion, or rather, not the prorogator itself, but rather, according to Ptolemy, the intervening parts, with the prorogator fixed immovably in the Ecliptic of the ninth sphere, and sustaining the circle of position, are led to Apheta. Therefore, whenever the prorogator, remaining in its seat, which it held in the position of the nativity, is invaded by the bodies of malefics, or their square or opposite rays, it is called διέρχεθ, which is commonly called cutting off. For when malefics or their threatening rays encounter the moderator of life or the horoscope in this way, they cut off life, or at least bring danger to the body. But the parts which, by their approach to the lord of life, usually bring death or danger to life, are called μοίρας αναιρετικά's, that is, lethal and intervening parts, from the malignancy of the place, as was said above. These can be distinguished in this way according to Ptolemy's opinion: but we, in the exposition of the author, for the sake of teaching, will retain his and the other appellations of those who wrote after Ptolemy, by which universal progressions are not so badly, it seems, designated by peculiar appellations.

[Direction and Profection]
They are distinguished. They call the method of 21 ἀφέσεωμ, by which the chronocrators are taken from the times of the equinoctial Catholic circle, a direction. The other method of progression, by which the annual, monthly, and daily disposers of times are ordered, they call profection. And profections were discussed in the previous chapter: In this chapter, however, the author explains the laws of directions, of which this is the description. To direct is to artificially investigate the arc of the equinoctial intercepted between the significator and the promittor, co-ascending or co-descending with the arc of the Ecliptic, with respect to the circle of position, in which one of them lies, that is: To direct is nothing other than to see how many degrees of the world the midheaven or the horizon of the climate, and another circle of position, pass, while a star or a first place is led to another star or to the rays of another, or to some other second place. We call here, as above, the circle of position by the intersections of the meridian and the horizon and the path of the star. We call the significator or Apheta the first place, to which the second is led, and which obtains the role of the subject, about to receive some change at a certain time from the promittor. The other, however, who progresses to the former, and who plays the role of the active cause, is called the promittor and Anareta. For, as I warned a little earlier, in direct direction according to Ptolemy's opinion, the Anareta is led to the aphetic place, not the Apheta to the Anareta, as is commonly thought. I will shortly subjoin his words concerning the anaretic parts, which occur in the converse direction of the apheta, from which it will be clear that in converse direction, the Apheta invades the destroying parts, whence it immediately follows that in the other or direct direction, the anaretas seek the apheta by their influence. The time, however, which elapses while some place of the sky moves to the seat of another place, either measures the period of the native's life, or defines the outcome of some other event, if it is resolved into parts or times of the equinoctial, for there will be as many future years as there are equal times of direction. Therefore, five scruples will show a month, and single scruples will show six days and two hours. Furthermore, there are two kinds of direction: One Regiomontanus in problem 25 calls direct direction, in which the second place, that is, the promittor or anareta, is understood to be led to the position of the first, that is, to the seat of the significator or apheta. This is done in the subsequent signs, according to the ascensions of the apheta itself, and by Ptolemy it is called ἀκινοβολία, that is, the projection of rays, because by the mere deduction of a ray to a similar position, it simply collects the time of a future event. The other, εἰς τὰ προαγόμλra, that is, into the preceding signs, he calls converse direction, in which the Aphetic place is transferred to the place of the anareta according to the ascensions of the anareta itself in the preceding signs. Some diviners use this direction for horoscopes and other lots, and for leading retrograde planets. But I see Ptolemy making this method proper to the significator of life constituted between the cusp of the tenth and seventh houses. Ptolemy wants, however, when the significator of life from such a position is to be led εἰς τὰ προκγόμενα, that only that place which is in the western terminator should be destroyed, and for that reason, the giver of life in western places, that is, found from the culmination of the sky and between the western cardinal point, acts both in subsequent and preceding signs. But in this case, when the Apheta is led by diurnal motion to a similar position of a star or ray existing in the preceding signs, the time that elapses in the meantime does not measure the delay of a future event, but the time by which the apheta is carried to the center of the setting, increases or decreases, by reason of the horary times of the place of the planet, which, or whose rays, retard or more quickly propel the descending apheta, and by reason of the distance by which the same planet is distant from the western cardinal point. For the rays or bodies of planets, which are before the Apheta and between the western cardinal point, do not set, but if they are benefic and opposing, then they inhibit the fall of the apheta progressing to the west, and add years, months, and days to it. Conversely, if they are malefic, they more quickly and prematurely push the apheta tending to the western cardinal point, and subtract years, months, and days from it: Mercury, however, to whichever it is joined, will help them. This direction is called ὡριμαία, because besides the time of progression, it also observes the gifts and spoils of the places opposing the falling Apheta. But how much they add or subtract is gathered from the parts of each position. For as many horary times as there are for each part, that is, of the planet adding or subtracting, diurnal by day, nocturnal by night, so many years are signified: which number, indeed, when a benefic planet is found in the ascendant, is to be added entirely to the years collected by the progression of the Apheta to the west: or is to be subtracted from them, if it is malefic and found in the ascendant. But if such a planet is not in the east, as many hours as the adding or subtracting planet is distant from the ascendant, so many parts of the horary times recede or accede, so that at the setting it comes to nothing, which is to be added to the predicted time, or to be subtracted from it: which matter, otherwise obscure, we will make clearer by an exemplary discussion. In our example, since the Sun is found in the eighth place and in a masculine sign, and finally in a paternal hexagon of Saturn exercising the right of the diurnal triplicity in the part of the Sun, according to the opinion of the Arabs, we could not undeservedly pronounce it the Apheta, unless we thought the horoscoping part to be far preferable in this dominion, and that by the authority of Ptolemy, who expressly denies the dominion of life to planets residing in the eighth house as an idle place. However, for the sake of teaching, let us imagine it to be the moderator of life placed in the western hemisphere, since in examples we look not so much at the truth of the matter as at a clear exposition of the rules. First, therefore, according to Ptolemy's rule to be explained below, the equinoctial times by which the Sun revolves to the setting must be inquired. The distance of the Sun from the culmination of the sky is 56 parts, 17 scruples, 14, and the horary times...

[Critique of Regiomontanus's Method]
The difference here is that he did not provide the rationale for the operations, which we see in Alfonso's tables. Consequently, unless one is a very skilled mathematician, one must perpetually adhere to Regiomontanus's rule and tables, which he deliberately did so that people would be servants of his book, for which he was justly criticized by my father. For a person is liable to error in three ways. First, if some table is faulty in part. Second, if you somehow misunderstand the rule, which easily happens amidst so many variations of northern latitude, southern latitude, right ascension, oblique ascension, nocturnal or diurnal arcs, of the whole or of the half in the descending or ascending half, above or below the earth. For this reason, in my judgment, the best is a large solid sphere, or a large planisphere, made precisely from brass, etc. Thus, Cardan, though many praised the method of directing by the most learned Regiomontanus, scarcely approved of it due to the difficulty of operation, and in his later years, being confirmed in the truth of the art, he seems rarely or never to have used it. But to discuss these matters at greater length is not our purpose, for we aim not so much to explain what is true in this matter as to provide a clear method of directing. First, then, to begin with the author's method of directing, we are admonished here, above all, to diligently ascertain in which part of the sky the significator planet is situated, whose varied position in different places causes us to attend now to the ascensions of the sphere, now to those of the climate in which we are situated, when collecting times. For if the significator is placed in the eastern angle, according to the ascensions of the climate; if it holds the western angle, according to the descensions of the climate; if finally it occupies the midheaven or the imum coeli, the times of future events must be measured and calculated according to the right ascensions of the sphere. Therefore, if you wish to direct the significator located in the ascendant to some place of the subsequent promittor, subtract the oblique ascensions of the significator from the oblique ascensions of the promittor, that is, subtract the beginning of the arc from the end: for what remains will show the arc of direction. For example, if the Sun from Capricorn makes a square aspect to the 12th part of Aries, and Jupiter is placed in the ending degree of Cologne, holding the fifth part of Pisces, and is to be directed to the square rays of the Sun, first you will seek the oblique ascension of the promittor, that is, the 12th part of Aries, from the table calculated for latitude 51 degrees (for such is the altitude of the north pole of Cologne), and you will find it to be 5 degrees, 8 minutes. Then in a similar way, take the oblique ascension of the significator, namely the 5th part of Pisces, which is 349 degrees, 2 minutes. Third, subtract the latter ascension, namely that of the significator, which is 349 degrees, 2 minutes, from the former ascension, that is, of the promittor, which is 5 degrees, 8 minutes, accommodating a full revolution or 360 degrees; for this must always be done whenever in physical calculation the lower exceeds the higher and therefore cannot be subtracted from it. This done, there will remain 16 degrees, 6 minutes of the sought direction. But if the significator was in the angle of the west, subtract the oblique descension of the significator from the oblique descension of the promittor, and the times of direction will remain. Nor is it otherwise what the author prescribes, that the oblique ascension of the point diametrically opposite the place of the significator (for the Arabs call this the nadir) should be subtracted from the oblique ascension of the point which is diametrically opposite the place of the promittor. For in an oblique sphere, the ascension of a sign is the descension of the opposite sign, and conversely, the descension of a sign is the ascension of the opposite sign, as in the previous example: If the Sun is in the western angle, and is to be directed to a ray: first, the descension of the promittor, that is, the 12th part of Aries, must be sought, or what is the same, the oblique ascension of the 12th part of the opposite sign, that is, Libra, must be found, which is 196 degrees, 55 minutes. Then similarly, the descension of the significator, that is, the 5th part of Pisces, must be extracted, that is, the ascension of the opposite sign, the 5th part of Virgo, which is 144 degrees, 40 minutes, which, subtracted from the former, leaves the sought times of direction, 52 degrees, 15 minutes. Finally, if the significator is in the midheaven or imum coeli, the right ascension of the significator must be subtracted from the right ascension of the promittor, so that the sought times of direction emerge. Example: In the same altitude of the region, 51 degrees, the culminating point of a certain nativity was 16 degrees of Scorpio, the significator of honor and mastery, which I wish to direct to the Sun, that is, to the promittor, which was in 9 degrees of Leo. Therefore, subtract the right ascension of the significator, which is 107 degrees, 22 minutes, from the right ascension of the promittor, which is 131 degrees, 27 minutes, and there remain 24 degrees, 14 minutes, the sought direction of the Midheaven to the trine of the Sun. The operation is to be performed in precisely the same way whenever the significator holds the Imum Coeli. All approved masters agree that Aphetas existing in the angles are to be directed in this way, and Ptolemy has often admonished this. Likewise, Hermes in his 25th enunciation says: "The progression of the ruler, when it is placed in the midheaven, make it by the ascensions of the sphere; but when it is constituted in the ascendant, by the ascensions of the climate." 2. So far concerning the method of directing the significator situated in the angles. In the following, he explains what should be followed if it is found outside the angles, namely, both the ascensions of the climate and of the sphere must be taken, and at the same time mixed together by tempering. Here, above all, he warns that it must be ascertained whether the significator is above or below the earth. This done, the distance of the significator from the Midheaven or Imum Coeli must be investigated in this way: If the Apheta, being above the earth, is in the eastern quadrant, that is, if it has not yet reached the meridian, subtract the right ascension of the midheaven from the right ascension of the Apheta. But if it is in the western quadrant, that is, if it has passed the meridian, yet still remaining above the earth, subtract the right ascension of the Apheta from the right ascension of the Midheaven, and the diurnal distance of the Apheta from the meridian or Midheaven will remain, which, as the author prescribes, must be divided by the temporal hours of the Apheta, and indeed diurnal, so that the temporal hours of the Apheta by which it is distant from the Midheaven emerge. Similarly, if the Apheta is below the earth, you will calculate its distance from the meridian or Imum Coeli with equal ease. For if it is in the quadrant of the descending half, that is, if it is before the meridian below the earth, subtract the right ascension of the angle of the earth from the right ascension of the Apheta. But if it is in the quadrant of the ascending half, that is, if it has passed the angle of the earth, then subtract the right ascension of the Apheta from the right ascension of the angle, and its nocturnal distance from the meridian will remain, which must be divided by the nocturnal temporal hours of the significator, so that the number of the section shows the elongation of the Apheta from the angle of the earth in temporal hours. To the same end, and perhaps more easily, you will arrive if you operate through opposite points. For the distance of a place from the Imum Coeli is equal to the distance by which the point diametrically opposite the said place...

[Calculating Direction in the Ascending Hemisphere]
Let the apheta be constituted in the 9th part, and the square rays of Saturn, to which it is to be directed, be in the 6th part. The angle of the Midheaven is 15 degrees. The right ascension of the apheta or Sun is 311 degrees, 27 minutes. The right ascension of the Midheaven is 279 degrees, 48 minutes, which, subtracted from the right ascension of the apheta, leaves its distance from the Midheaven as 31 degrees, 39 minutes, which was to be sought first. Then I want to inquire into the hourly times of the apheta or Sun traversing the 9th part of Aquarius, and I see in the table of the quantity of days under the altitude of the pole of 51 degrees, directly opposite the 9th part, 7 hours, 35 minutes, which I multiply by 24, making the hourly times 18 hours, 58 minutes, and indeed nocturnal, because it is from the southern signs. But because we need diurnal hourly times, I subtracted these nocturnal times from 30 parts, and immediately the diurnal times of 11 degrees, 2 minutes appeared, by which I divided the distance of the apheta from the Midheaven, that is, 31 degrees, 39 minutes, and I extracted 2 temporal hours, 52 minutes, by which the apheta is distant from the Midheaven. Now, in order to have the significator of the direct circle, from the right ascension of the rays of Saturn, namely, striking the sixth part of Pisces, which is 337 degrees, 48 minutes, I subtracted the right ascension of the apheta, which is 311 degrees, 27 minutes, and there remained the significator of the direct circle, 28 degrees, 21 minutes. For the significator of the oblique circle, from the oblique ascension of the rays of Saturn, which is 349 degrees, 30 minutes, I subtracted the oblique ascension of the apheta, which is 335 degrees, 10 minutes, and there remained the significator of the region, 14 degrees, 20 minutes. Therefore, the difference of the significators is 3 parts, which, divided by 6, yielded 0 parts, 30 minutes, or half of one part, to be multiplied by the temporal hours by which the significator is distant from the meridian, that is, by 2 hours, 52 minutes. This done, the hourly times of 1 degree, 26 minutes resulted as the equation, to be subtracted from the significator of the direct circle, for the reason that it is greater than the significator of the climate. This done, the sought direction remained 27 degrees, 54 minutes. This process of the author plainly depends on the rule of proportions: For that he orders the difference of the significators to be divided by 6, and the number of the section to be multiplied by the number of temporal hours by which the significator is distant from the Midheaven, is the same as if he had proposed these numbers in the rule of proportions in the usual way, thus: In six temporal hours the direction varies (to repeat the same example) by 3 parts, how much will the same direction vary in 2 temporal hours, 52 minutes, by which the apheta recedes from the meridian? Temporal hours: 6. Difference of significators: 3 parts. Temporal hours by which apheta is distant from Midheaven: 2 hours, 52 minutes. Furthermore, since in the process of the rule of proportions we not only divide the number generated from the mutual product of the second and third by the first, but also divide the second by the first, and correctly multiply the number of the section by the third, so as to arrive at the fourth and unknown, it is clear why the author orders the difference of the significators to be divided by 6, and the number of the section to be multiplied by the temporal hours by which the apheta is distant from the cardine, so that the equation of the direction may result. But you will elicit this same equation more certainly and much more expeditiously if, in the rule of proportions, you place the semi-diurnal or semi-nocturnal arc of the significator in the first place, and in the second place you place the difference of the significators. Finally, in the third place, you establish the distance of the significator from the cardine. For with the operation of the rule completed, the fourth number will show the equation to be added to or subtracted from the significator of the sphere, as the ratio of the calculation itself demands. As in the example above, from the tables of ascensions, or even, if you please, from the table of the quantity of days, you will find the semi-diurnal arc of the apheta to be 66 degrees, 4 minutes. Say then: in the space of 66 degrees, 4 minutes, the direction varies by 3 parts; how much will it vary in 31 minutes, by which the place of the apheta is removed from the apex of the sky? It makes 1 degree, 26 minutes, as above. But if the significator is between the horoscopus and the Midheaven, the operation must be performed in exactly the same way, except that in such a case, for the apheta, just as nocturnal local hours are used, so also are semi-nocturnal arcs. Therefore, I believe no example is needed here. From these, the author's opinion regarding the direction of the significator residing in the ascending hemisphere is clear. The method of directing the apheta or significator residing in the descending hemisphere, which is the arc from the angle of the earth to the Midheaven, calculated through the seventh house, follows. The canon of operation here does not differ from the former, except that, as is also clear from the text, where we used ascensions in the ascending hemisphere, here in the descending hemisphere, descensions must be used, or, which is the same, the work must be instituted precisely by the ascensions of the opposite points. For example, let the Imum Coeli be 15 degrees, 0 minutes, and the apheta or significator be in 15 degrees, constituted to be directed to the body of Mercury placed in 15 degrees, Virgo. And since the apheta is found below the earth and in the descending hemisphere, therefore, by operating through opposite points and nocturnal hourly times, we will reach the true goal. The right ascension of the apheta is 137 degrees, 29 minutes. The right ascension of the Imum Coeli is 106 degrees, 17 minutes. The distance of the apheta from the cardine is 31 degrees, 12 minutes. But the nocturnal semi-arc of the apheta (for the apheta resides below the earth) is 68 degrees, 45 minutes, and its nocturnal hourly times are 11 degrees, 28 minutes, or in total 688 minutes, by which I divided the distance of the apheta from the Imum Coeli, which is 31 degrees, 12 minutes, that is, 1872 first minutes, and I produced 2 hours, 43 minutes, by which temporal hours the apheta is removed from the cardine. From this, I sought the difference of the significators in the following way. The right descension of the promissor, that is, the right ascension of 5 degrees, is 346 degrees, 12 minutes. The right descension of the apheta, that is, the right ascension of 15 degrees, is 317 degrees, 27 minutes. The significator of the sphere is 28 degrees, 43 minutes. The oblique descension of the promissor is 353 degrees, 34 minutes. The oblique descension of the apheta is 338 degrees, 46 minutes. The significator of the climate is 14 degrees, 48 minutes, which I subtracted from the significator of the sphere, and there remained the difference of the significators, 13 degrees, 55 minutes, which I divided by 6, and I extracted the number of the section, 2 degrees, 19 minutes, which I multiplied by the hours by which the apheta is distant from the Imum Coeli, that is, by 2 hours, 43 minutes, and I produced 6 degrees, 18 minutes, which is the equation to be subtracted from the significator of the sphere exceeding the significator of the climate. This done, the sought direction remained 22 degrees, 25 minutes. The same goal is reached by operating through the nocturnal semi-arc of the apheta. Arrangement of numbers for the Rule of Proportion: 1. The semi-nocturnal arc of the apheta is 68 degrees, 45 minutes. The difference of the significators is 13 degrees, 55 minutes. Or thus: 13. The distance of the apheta from the cardine is 31 degrees, 12 minutes. 31. 684. The second number multiplied by the third, yields 4345908, divided by 684, yields the equation of 6 degrees, 18 minutes, to be subtracted, as said, from the significator of the sphere, so that the direction of 22 degrees, 25 minutes, which we proposed to find, remains. Finally, the converse direction, or in the preceding, is done in the same way by which the direct is perfected, with this one observation: that ascensions and descensions are calculated in the circle of position of the promissor and not of the significator. For just as the promissor is carried to the place of the significator, so here the significator is understood to be led to the place of the promissor. Therefore, if the promissor is placed in the Midheaven, we will subtract the right ascensions of the promissor from the right ascensions of the significator. But if the same has been the horoscopus, we will subtract the ascensions of the climate of the promissor from the ascensions of the climate of the significator. Finally, if the promissor has held the angle of the west, we will deduce its descensions from the descensions of the significator, so that the sought direction remains. What, however, should be followed if none of the cardines holds the promissor, but the same is constituted between the said places, can be clear from those canons which are set forth in the exposition of the direct direction, namely, both ascensions or descensions are to be taken, and at the same time proportionally mixed, as we have said. From these, the author's opinion regarding the deduction of Aphetic places is clear, in which, like Ptolemy, he despised

[Planetary Latitudes and Directions]
Planetary latitudes, which are more observed in this matter, have accustomed to evidently vary the times of directions. Therefore, if anyone, following this author's method of directing, also wishes to consider latitudes, they must use the tables of Johannes Blanchinus, by the aid of which the ascensions of all places of the sky deviating from the Ecliptic are most easily found. The tables of directions by Regiomontanus also provide the same and more copiously, but their use is more difficult and admits only a well-practiced calculator. Blanchinus's tables were also composed in Italy. For other regions, as far as the right sphere is concerned, it satisfies all. As for the oblique sphere, everyone must construct one for themselves with the aid of Regiomontanus's tables for the altitude of their region. The author's method of directing is not very dissimilar from the tradition of Ptolemy, according to whose opinion the times of directions are collected in this manner. First and foremost, the Apheta and the remaining significators, whose progressions principally signify the times of events, must be observed. Similarly, the places of the planets or promissors, that is, the radiations of the stars occurring, must be described and noted. For the sake of avoiding obscurity, it was pleasing to use these words very generally in this place, so that whatever is said here about the deduction of the Apheta or the lord, you may also understand it concerning all other significators of events, so that by the name Apheta, we understand every significator, and by the name Anareta, every promissor. These things being so, then the distance of both the Apheta and the promissors from the midheaven must be taken, if the Apheta is above the earth; or their difference from the imum coeli must be investigated, if the Apheta is found below the horizon. After this, the horary times of individual places, diurnal if the place of the Apheta is above the earth, but nocturnal if below the earth, must be collected, and then the distance of the Apheta from the cardine, just found by the horary times of the Apheta, must be divided by the horary times, so that the temporal hours by which the Apheta is removed from the cardine may result: all of which will be accomplished according to the method abundantly explained in the exposition of the text. Finally, the horary times of the Anareta must be multiplied by the hours by which the Apheta is distant from the cardine of the sky, and what is produced, according to the following cautions, must be added to or subtracted from the difference or distance of the Anareta from the cardine of the sky. The number that results from this will be the number of parts and minutes of the direction, or it will be the number of years, months, and days, after which the promissor will come to the significator: indeed, each degree thus computed counts as a year, and each minute as a month, and each single second as six days and two hours. Rules of Prohairesis: If the Apheta is above the earth, subtract the produced number from the direct difference of the promissor (here we call the difference of the place from the cardine the distance) if the Apheta is between the ascendant and the Midheaven. If both are between the Midheaven and the seventh house, the direct difference of the promissor must be subtracted from the produced number. But if the Apheta is below the earth between the imum coeli and the seventh house, then, as in the first case, the product must be subtracted from the difference of the promissor. But if the Apheta is between the imum coeli and the horoscope, the difference of the promissor, as was done in the second case, is subtracted from the product. Finally, if the Apheta is in the eastern quadrant, and the promissor is in the western quadrant, whether above or below the earth, then the difference of the Apheta must be added to the product. From these, it is clear that the opposite quadrants of the sky correspond to each other completely. Therefore, when the Apheta is found below the earth, with opposite points, just as if the Apheta were above the earth, you will perform the operation to the same end, perhaps with less effort. And this is the reason why Cardanus, in this whole matter, teaches that no more than 4 or rather 3 differences, which follow, are found, which is true, if, as I said, the opposite points are attended to. If the Apheta is in the Midheaven, nothing is added to the difference of the ascensions, but simply, as has been said, the direction is made by the ascensions of the sphere. 2. Apheta between the Midheaven and the horoscope: the product is subtracted from the difference of the promissor. 3. Both Apheta and Anareta in the western quadrant: then the difference is subtracted from the product. Apheta in the eastern quadrant, Anareta in the western quadrant: then the difference is combined with the product. Example of a significator between the Midheaven and the horoscope. I wish to direct the Moon first to the trine radiation of Mars, and then to the body of Saturn, so that the Moon, initially inimical to Mars, has the first place or the place of the significator, and the rays of Mars and Saturn have the place of the promissor. Since the Moon is below the earth, we will therefore operate more conveniently through opposite places falling into the eastern quadrant of the world, that is, we will make the place of the Moon in 27 degrees 52 minutes of Leo, and the rays of Mars in 28 degrees 21 minutes of Virgo, and finally the place of Saturn in 26 degrees 42 minutes of Libra. And since the place of the Moon is understood to be between the horoscope and the Midheaven, I therefore first subtracted the right ascension of the Midheaven from the right ascension of the place which we have for the Moon's place, and there remained a difference of the Moon of 26 degrees 11 minutes, which I divided by the diurnal horary times of the Moon's place, which are 18 degrees 21 minutes, and the number of the section showed me 1 hour 27 minutes of the Moon's preceding distance from the Midheaven. Then I subtracted the right ascension of the Midheaven from the right ascension of the malefics, and there remained a direct distance, of Mars's trine 54 degrees 35 minutes, and of Saturn 80 degrees 52 minutes. Finally, I multiplied the diurnal horary times of the trine radiation of Mars, that is, 15 degrees 7 minutes, by the temporal hours 1 hour 27 minutes, by which the Moon's place is distant from the Midheaven, and the number produced was 21 degrees 57 minutes, which, since the Moon's place is above the earth in the eastern quadrant, I subtracted from the difference of Mars's trine radiation, that is, from 54 degrees 35 minutes, and there remained 32 degrees 38 minutes, that is, 32 years, 7 months, and 18 days: after which time the body of the Moon passes through the trine of Mars. We produced the times of direction of 59 degrees 34 minutes, by which the Moon moves to Saturn, by exactly the same form of computation. This is Ptolemy's formula for directing, which, somewhat changed and with one operation removed, we will achieve the same goal, and we will perform all directions most easily in the following way. To all Aphetas and Anaretas, first assign the difference of the right ascension from the right ascension of the Midheaven, from the table of right ascensions placed below. Then, similarly, add to these, opposite them, the horary times of each place from the table of the quantity of days: diurnal, if the Apheta is above the earth; but nocturnal, if the Apheta is below the earth. These things being thus arranged, multiply the direct difference of the Apheta or significator by the horary times of the Anareta or promissor, and then divide what is produced by the horary times of the significator, and subtract the number of the section from the direct difference of the promissor, or you will subtract this same from that, according to the fourfold.

[Calculating Directional Numbers]
The difference is that distinction explained above. For the number here is the number of the fourth direction. Let us repeat, for greater clarity, the previous example, in which the Moon is led to the trine of Mars and the body of Saturn. First, therefore, opposite these celestial places, I placed the differences of ascensions from the midheaven, and then, because the place of the significator is above the earth, I added to each its diurnal hourly times, as you see in the present description: Differences: 1. Part 26, scrup. 11 1. Part 54, scrup. 35 12. Hourly times: 1. Part 18, scrup. 2 1. Part 80, scrup. 52 1. Part 15, scrup. 7 1. Part 14, scrup. 40 Having thus set these, I multiplied the hourly times of the trine radiation of Mars, p.15.sc.7, by the difference of the rectified place, which is p.26.sc.11, and produced sixty 61, p.35.sc.45, or if you prefer, p.395.sc.45, which I divided by the hourly times of the place (namely p.18.sc.2), and extracted the section number p.21.sc.57. And because the places of Apheta and Angreta are between the ascendant and the midheaven, therefore I subtracted this product from the direct difference of the trine rays of Mars, which is p.54.sc.35, and there remained p.32.sc.38, to which correspond 32 years, 7 months, 18 days, no differently than in the above calculation. In the same way, multiplying the lunar difference by the hourly times of Saturn, we produced sixty 61, p.24.sc.11, which, divided by the hourly times of the Moon's place, yielded p.21.sc.18, to be subtracted from the difference of the same Saturn, so that the number of direction, namely p.59.sc.33, comes out. Another example: In the same nativity, if you wish to deduce the square of Saturn to the Sun, then, having described the differences of these places and their hourly times as instructed, multiply the difference of the Sun by the hourly times of the square radiation of Saturn, and the Differences of the hourly times: P. 56. scrup. 58 P.18.sc.22 P.37.sc.32 P.18.sc.42 produces sixty 171, p.45.sc.16, which, if you divide by the hourly times of the Sun, that is, by p.18.sc.22, you will elicit p.58 exactly, from which the difference of Saturn must be subtracted, because both places are contained between the western horizon and the culmination of the sky, so that the number of direction p.20.scrup.28 remains.

[Direction in Hemicycles]
From these examples, the method of directing is clear, if both the significator and the promissor are found in the hemicycle ascending to the culmination of the sky: then the entire direction is made by ascensions in the semicircle of the significator's position. For all circles of position in the ascending half are of ascensions. Similarly, if both hold the hemicycle of the world descending to the subterranean cusp, the entire direction is completed by ascensions in the hemicycle of Apheta or the significator: for all semicircles of position in the descending half are of descensions. But what is to be done if ascension is changed into descension, or descension into ascension? As if Apheta, being between the seventh house and the midheaven, is to be led to the promissor, which is between the ascendant and the midheaven? I answer, according to the opinion of Ptolemy and the author, that in such a case, first the midheaven must be led to Apheta by the descensions of Apheta's circle of position: then the promissor must be moved to the culmination of the midheaven by the ascensions of the right sphere: and finally, these two arcs of direction must be joined, so that the number of the entire direction comes forth. In the assumed nativity, directing the Sun, placed in the quadrant of the descending half of the world, to the square radiation of Mars, which falls in p.28.sc.21 of Leo, and in the quadrant of the ascending half of the world, we first described both the difference of each place from the midheaven and the hourly times, as you see on the side. Then, multiplying the difference of the Sun by the hourly times of the square of Mars, we produced sixty 1519, p.58.sc.56, which, divided by the hourly times of the Sun, yielded the distance of the square of Mars translated to the Sun's place from the midheaven, part 52.sc.12, which, when joined with the first distance of the same square of Mars, which is p.26.sc.36, makes the number of direction part 78.sc.48.

[Finding the Degree of the Zodiac]
The other place of this chapter follows, concerning finding the degree of the zodiac to which the direction of Apheta reaches in a given year of age. As in our example, where the eastern horizon falls in part 26.scrup. 44 of Libra, if it is proposed to find to what degree of the zodiac the direction of the ascendant reaches in the 40th year, 5 months, 6 days of the native's age, first take the oblique ascension of the significator, that is, of the ascendant part 26.sc.44, which is 213 parts, 55 scrup., and to this add 40 parts, 26 scrup., according to the elapsed time from the root, and you will collect 254 parts, 21 scrup., with which, entering the area of the oblique table (for the barbaric word 'arcuare' signifies this here), you will find that 28 parts, 21 scrup. of Scorpio correspond to them, where the epoch of Mars is. Therefore, the direction of the ascendant will reach that point of the zodiac when 40 years, 5 months, 6 days are completed. The rest of this place is easy, and not dissimilar to what has been said.

[Choosing Rulers of Time]
It follows how the Catholic arbiters of times are to be chosen. It seems, however, that here the divider, that is, the lord of the term, is preferred to the lord of the rays, which is contrary to Ptolemy, who attributes the principal dominion to the star or ray meeting Apheta, and makes the lord of the term a participant in its dominion. His words on this matter are found near the end of the Quadripartite construction: 'And first, indeed, time in each moderation will be given to him who occupies the Aphetic place by body or by rays. But if there is no one precisely in the Aphetic place, we will take the planet or ray immediately preceding it, until it looks at the next succeeding part. Then we will use this until the next, and similarly in others, taking into communication for governing the planetary lords of the terms.' The matter will be clearer with an exemplary discussion. In our example, the eastern horizon encompasses part 26.sc.44 of Libra, to which, since the opposite ray of Saturn almost exactly rests, therefore we constitute Saturn as the first arbiter of times, with Mars participating in the rule, according to Ptolemy's opinion, as the lord of the terms. But a little later, in part 27.sc.21, where the trine radiation of Jupiter and the Moon succeeds the diameter of Saturn.

[Algebugthar: Direction of the Ascendant]
438. DIFFERENCE. Concerning Algebugthar. And from this follows Algebugthar in nativities: it is the direction of the ascendant degree, that is, that you look at the degree of the ascendant in the term of which planet it is, you subtract the ascensions of the ascendant from the ascensions which are in the direct day of the end of the planet's term by the ascensions of the region, and what remains, you will take for each degree one year, and for every five minutes a month: and for every minute six days: and the lord of the term will be the disposer of the years, who is called the divider. After this, you will take the degrees of the term which succeeds it, you will also convert them into degrees of ascensions, and whatever it is, you will take for each degree one year, and for every five minutes a month, and for every minute six days, and the lord of the term will be the divider and disposer of those years. Similarly, you will proceed with every term of the lord by succession until the end of life: and if it is in the term of any planet: the planet or its rays will be participants in the division: this division is called Algebugthar. Concerning the direction of the ascendant to the planetary terms, which the Arabs call Algebuthar. Here consider the horoscoping degree, and observe to which planet's terms it refers, and how far the terms of that planet extend. Then, having found the ascensions of the climate for both the ascendant degree and the extreme part of the terms, subtract the former from the latter, and the sought direction of the horoscope to the proposed term will remain. For example, in the assumed nativity, in which we suppose the elevation of the vertex to be 41 parts, the horoscope is 26 parts, 44 minutes of Libra, which, according to Ptolemy's arrangement of terms, Mars presides over. The same Mars has dominion over the terms at the beginning of Scorpio, and extends to the end of the sixth part of the same Scorpio. The ascension of the climate of the horoscope is 213 parts, 55 minutes. The ascension of the climate at the same elevation of the extreme part of Mars's terms, 439. that is, 6 parts of Scorpio, is 225 parts, 46 minutes, from which, if the oblique ascension of the horoscope is subtracted, there remain 11 parts, 51 minutes, that is, 11 years, 10 months, 6 days, of which time Mars is the lord. The immediately succeeding terms assigned to Jupiter extend to 14 parts of Scorpio, whose oblique ascension is found to be 236 parts, 3 minutes, from which if you subtract the ascension of the extreme part of the immediately preceding terms of Mars, there will remain 10 parts, 11 minutes, that is, 6 years, 3 months, 12 days, the time of Jupiter's governance, which, combined with the time assigned to Mars a little earlier, makes the native's age 32 years, 1 month, 18 days. In this way, the direction of the ascendant to the end of life is to be continued to foresee illnesses and impediments that will occur to the native in the body. You can, if you wish, form a table from which the progression of the ascendant to the planetary terms can be most easily derived for each year, in this way: For the beginning of the first year of the nativity, assign the horoscoping degree at the head of the table. Then take the ascension of the horoscope in the climate, to which for each succeeding year you add single degrees in order, and what results from this, search for it in the area of the same table of ascensions, and observe to which place of the zodiac it corresponds: for that will claim the right of division or disposition for itself in that year. In our example, for the first current year, 26 parts, 44 minutes of Libra are to be assigned, to whose climate ascension, that is, 213 parts, 55 minutes, if you add one degree of the equinoctial, you will form the oblique ascension of 214 parts, 55 minutes for the second year, to which correspond in the table 27 parts, 31 minutes of Libra. By such a continuous addition of equinoctial parts to the ascension of the horoscope, you will easily extend the entire order of parts to be inserted into the table for each year of the native's life, with the help of your climate table, until the end of the native's life. Finally, to the parts of the zodiac found in this way, the lords of the terms, who bear the appellation of divider, are to be ascribed from Ptolemy's table of terms, or, if you prefer, from the Egyptians, as is evident in the following example. These precepts concerning the horoscope can and should be referred in a similar way to the deduction of the positions of the other significators in their circles. 440. Table of division or direction of the horoscope, which the Arabs call Algebuthar. Years of age, Parts of division, deg. min., Divider. Years of age, Parts of division, deg. min., Divider. Years of age, Parts of division, deg. min., Divider. 8 126 44 07/15/7 401 129 18 34 2 27 31 168 27 3019 21 13 28 18 179 21 31/20. 71 1429 6 18/10 01 530m 19/10 47 32/20 48211 33/21 41 60 40% 2011 341 34/22 29 17 261 21/12 28 135/23 161 82 13 22/13 7 3624 3 19 13 12313 47 137/24 461 10/3 47 124/14 41 12/38/25 401 114 344 62515 27 3926 26 12/5 20 2616 15 140/27 141271 13/6 15 2717 01 4128 147 8 28 17 47 42 28 46. Concerning the Duodenaries of Planets and Houses. 1. And from this the duodenaries of planets or houses: that is, that you look at how much the planet has traveled in its sign, in whatever it may be, or the degree of the house you wish, in degrees and minutes: and you will multiply this by 12. After this, you will add to it those degrees and minutes which you multiplied by 12. And what is collected, from it you will cast off from the beginning of the degrees of the same sign: giving to each sign 30 degrees: and where the number is finished, there will be the duodenary of the planets and houses. Concerning their Novenaries. 2. And from this Anaubarach, which are the novenaries. The knowledge of which is, that you know how much the planet has traveled in its sign in degrees and minutes, or the degree of the house whose novenary you wish to know. After this, divide the sign into nine divisions, and each division is of three degrees and a third part of one degree. After this, you will look in which novenary out of the nine novenaries the degree of the planet or house falls. After this, you will give the first novenary from the signs to the lord of the movable sign of the same triplicity, and the second novenary to the lord of the sign whose sign it is that succeeds: until you come to some novenary, from which the degree is, and the planet will be the lord of its novenary. For example: if the sign from which that degree was, was from the triplicity of Aries: then the first novenary of the same sign will be Mars, lord of Aries, and the second novenary will be Venus, lady of Taurus, and the third novenary will be Mercury, lord of Gemini. Similarly up to the ninth novenary. And if the sign is from the triplicity of Cancer, its first novenary will be the Moon, the second novenary will be the Sun, lord of Leo: and the third will be Mercury, lord of Virgo. And if the sign is from the triplicity of Libra, its first novenary will be Venus, lady of Libra, and the second will be Mars, lord of Scorpio, and the third will be Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius. Similarly in the triplicity of Capricorn, its first novenary is Saturn, lord of Capricorn: and the second similarly Saturn, lord of Aquarius, and the third Jupiter, lord of Pisces, then what follows according to the order of succession of the signs. For example: a planet or some house out of the twelve houses was in the 19th degree of Aquarius, if the sign is divided into nine divisions, the 19th degree will be in the sixth division, and because the sign of Aquarius is in the triplicity of Libra: its first novenary is placed as Venus, lady of Libra: the second Mars, lord of Scorpio, and the third Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius. The fourth Saturn, lord of Capricorn, and the fifth also Saturn, lord of Aquarius, and the sixth Jupiter, lord of Pisces, and Naubahar, that is, the novenary of the 19th degree of Aquarius, will be Jupiter. Method of finding the lord of the decan. 3. And from this Adorogen, that is, that you divide the ascendant into three parts, and each division is of 10 degrees: and you will give the first division to the lord of the ascendant, and the second to the lord of the fifth sign from it: and the third to the lord of the ninth: for the ascendant, 5th, and 9th are always one triplicity. For example: from the beginning of Aries up to the tenth degree of it, is Adorogen, that is, the decanate of Mars. And if it is from the 10th degree up to the 20th degree, its Adorogen will be the Sun, lord of Leo. And if it is from the 20th up to its end, its Adorogen will be Jupiter, lord of Sagittarius. 4. And from this the lord of the orb in nativities, that is, that you look at the lord of the hour in which the native is born, and you will give the ascendant and the lord of the hour in the first year of his nativity, and of the sign.

[Planetary Rulerships and Dignities]
Thus, these rulerships are exchanged, so that it is very easy to describe all these in a table. For the dodecatemoria of the planets, the decan lords, and the 84 salia are much more easily drawn from tables, which, as to how they should be composed by anyone, since we are sufficiently clearly admonished here, their description seemed superfluous to me, especially since the tradition of such things, as we have forewarned, differs greatly from the precepts of true art. This last chapter also appears to be such, containing nothing else but a very easy precept for constructing the tables of Ferdaria, that is, the years or times by which, according to the doctrine of the Arabs, the planets generally govern and rule the life of the native in order. The full years of Ferdaria for each planet are these: 111, 412, 07, 010, 8, 513, 9, 003, 2. The beginning of the rulership, however, is from the luminaries. For in a diurnal nativity, the Sun will principally govern for 10 years, to whom the next planet in order succeeds in rulership, that is, Venus, and she presides from the tenth to the eighteenth year of the native: after which Venus succeeds in rulership for 13 years. Then Mercury for 9 years. Then Saturn for 11 years. Then Jupiter for 12 years. Then Mars for 7 years. Then the Moon for 3 years. Finally, the Ascendant for 2 years. This is the complete circuit of planetary power in a diurnal nativity, containing 75 years, after which the rulership will return to the beginning and dominion of the Sun. Furthermore, in nocturnal nativities, the nocturnal luminary will assume rulership for the first 9 years, to whom the other succeeding planets will follow in series and order, as we have said. But truly, both in diurnal and nocturnal nativities, the rulership is distributed among these planets in such a way that each one governs alone for the seventh part of its years, but in the remaining seven parts of the rulership, it admits the six immediately succeeding planets as colleagues. For example, in a diurnal nativity, the first ten years are ascribed to the rulership of the Sun, but the Sun itself will govern the native for the seventh part of these years, that is, one solar year and approximately 156 days. In the second seventh part of its years, that is, from the 116th day of the native's first year to the completion of two years and 313 days, it will allow Venus as a partner in rulership: and in the third seventh part, the Sun, having dismissed Venus, will take Mercury as a colleague, and so on for the others that follow, as can be seen in tables, both in Ephemerides and widely described in Arabic books. Furthermore, this distinction of the Arabs seems to have been established in imitation of the primary Ptolemaic distinction of times, of which four exist concerning the four-part construction of the year. And from this Almanar, that is, pre-eminence, by which it is said that a planet goes above another planet: that is, so that you may observe the mean course of the planet and its equated place: if its equated place is less than its mean course, it will be ascending from the middle of its circle to the summit of the circle: and if its equated place is more than its mean course, it will be descending from the middle of its circle to its lowest point. And if its equated place is equal to its mean course, it will be in the middle of its circle. Then you will subtract the planet's place from its mean course. After you have most certainly known this, that is, the equated place: or conversely, subtracting the smaller from the larger of them: and you will multiply what remains by seven, you will divide by XXII, and what comes out of the division will be for every planet, according to the quantity of its ascent or descent. For Venus and Mercury, we take what is between both places, that is, what is between the place of the Sun and Venus and Mercury, and we do as above: because by this we know which of them is stronger in the circle of the apogee: but Venus and Mercury, when one of them is oriental, and its equated place is less than the Sun's place: you will take the remainder, which is between the Sun's place and its place: you will do with it as you have done, as was said for the higher planets by multiplication and division. And the signification of the planets will be more proper and stronger when they go above each other: that is, when one goes above the other in conjunction: but in opposition and in the fourth aspect, their signification will be less apparent and weaker. And yet when one of them is ascending and the other descending: then the ascending one goes above the descending one. But when both are descending: the one with the lesser descent goes above the one with the greater or more descent. But if both are ascending: the one with the greater ascent goes above the one with the lesser ascent. It is also said in another way, that is, so that you may know the latitude of the planets: because the northern one goes above the southern one. And if both are northern: the one with the greater latitude goes above the one with the lesser latitude. But if both are southern: the one with the lesser latitude goes above the one with the greater latitude, and therefore it is said that the Moon goes above Jupiter in these two operations. Similarly, if one of the two planets is in the middle of the circle, having no latitude: then the ascending northern one goes above the one that lacks latitude: the one that is without latitude goes above the descending southern one. And from this, the opening of the gates is said, when an inferior planet joins a superior planet, and their houses are opposite. And from this, concerning the eminence, superiority, or sublimity of the planets, which is universally to be understood with respect. For a planet is eminent when it is carried at the highest point of the shorter circle, which is called an Epicycle by the Greek name, while the other planet holds lower parts. For when a planet is held at the culmination of its epicycle, it seems to reign there in a certain way, sitting on a throne and dispensing justice: but the other, which is further from the apogee of the epicycle, and declines more from the summit of the circle, seems to sit at its feet and venerate the superior one. The Greeks call this power καθυπέρ-τέρησιμ, but more recent authors call it elevation, but quite ineptly: for the word 'elevare' in Latin means to depress or cast down, and the opposite word is 'extollere': to 'elevate' the affairs of an adversary is to depress them by diminishing them with words, and by depressing them, to render them more contemptible. But καθυπόρῶμ in Greek is the same as 'superare', 'to be superior', and 'to be extolled' in Latin. First, however, we are taught here by what reason we recognize one planet to be superior and more eminent than another, and that from the tables of motions, but somewhat confusedly as it appears: if indeed it calls the mean course of the planet the true motion of the center of the epicycle, which today in planetary theories are distinguished as follows. The mean motion of a planet or epicycle is the arc of the zodiac from the beginning according to succession, up to the line of the mean motion of the planet, which, drawn from the center of the world to the zodiac, is equally distant from the line extending from the center of the apogee to the center of the epicycle. The true motion of the epicycle is the arc of the zodiac calculated from the beginning up to the line of the true motion of the epicycle, which the author here calls the mean course of the planet. Finally, the true motion of the planet is the arc of the zodiac, which, beginning from the beginning, extends up to the line of the true motion of the planet, which goes from the center of the world through the body of the planet to the zodiac. They call the mean anomaly the arc of the epicycle calculated from its mean apogee to the body of the planet. But its true and equated anomaly is the arc of the epicycle, which extends from the true apogee of the same epicycle to the body of the planet, to which the corresponding arc in the zodiac is called προσθαφαίρεσις or the equation of the anomaly, to be added to the true motion of the epicycle, if the line of the true motion of the planet precedes the line of the true motion of the epicycle: or to be subtracted, if it follows the same, so that finally the true motion of the planet is elicited. Furthermore, the entire equation of the anomaly and the line of the true motion of the planet precedes the line of the true motion of the epicycle, when the planet is carried from the highest point of the epicycle to the lowest, and follows the same when in the other half it strives from the lowest point of the epicycle to its summit. With these things known, as they can be most easily recognized by inspecting the figures of the Theories, the author's meaning is clear. If, he says, the equated place of the planet is less than its mean course, that is, if the arc of the true motion of the planet is smaller.

[Lunar Anomaly and Longitude Calculation]
FIRST. 149 so that the true anomaly of the Moon may emerge. For, as it is said in the Theory of the Moon, when the center of the Moon is less than six common signs, then the true argument is greater than the mean, and vice versa. 1. Equation of the first epicycle. These things being so, 2. The following excess, a smaller part of which, corresponding to the proportional anomalies of the Moon, is added to the equation of the first epicycle, so that its true equation may emerge. It is subtracted from the mean motion. To the extreme minor, if the anomaly of the Moon is equated to a semicircle, the equation of the first epicycle is added to the longitude, so that the true distance of the Moon from the mean place may emerge. For since in the upper part of the epicycle it proceeds against the succession of the signs, it happens that when the true argument is less than six common signs, the line of mean motion precedes the line of true motion, and vice versa. Furthermore, the true distance of the Moon having been explored, the simple motion from the first star of Aries must be added to it; this done, the true distance of the Moon from the first star of Aries will emerge. To this, if you finally add the true precession of the vernal equinox, the true distance of the Moon from the vernal equinox in signs and parts of signs will emerge. There follows for a given time the diagram of the lunar motion. True precession of the equinox. Simple equal motion of the Moon from elongation. Anomaly of the Moon. Elongation from duplicated. Prosthaphaeresis of duplicated added. Proportional scruples. Anomaly of the Moon equated. Sexagesimal parts. 1 2 50 27 22 21 0 40 39 27 4.15 8 30 3 29 2 45 2 30 17 0 5 8 36 46 42 3_34 T3 21 Prosthaphaeresis. Digitized by Google. 150 DIFFERENCE. Its prosthaphaeresis added. 2 58 53 Following excess. 1 50 6 Part corresponding to proportional scruples. 0 1 43 2 Absolute prosthaphaeresis of the first epicycle added. 0. 4 41 55 True elongation. 4 19 50 25 And true place from the head. 5 29 50 Finally, the true place from the equinox. 5 27 52 13 parts. 27. sc. 52 12, of Aquarius. Thus, the Moon has at the given time, according to this calculation, the true places of the limits of the nodes. What the nodes and limits of the Moon are has been sufficiently explained above. The form of calculation, however, given in the 26th Prutenic precept, which we must now show, is this. For a given time, you will find these four things. 1st. The equal simple motion of the Sun. 2nd. The equal simple motion of the Moon from the Sun. 3rd. The true precession of the equinoxes. And these three can be assumed from the preceding. 4th. The equal motion of the Moon's latitude, which for the proposed time is found to be 5 sexagesimal parts, 27 scruples, 38.1, 42.23. These having been found, cast into one sum the simple motion with the elongation of the Moon from the Sun, and the equal longitude of the Moon from the first star of Aries will emerge, 4 sexagesimal parts, 55 scruples, 47.18.57.28. From this, subtract the equal motion of the Moon's latitude, so that you may make the remaining distance of the northern limit from the head of the starry Aries 5 sexagesimal parts, 28 scruples, 9.18.15.24. From this, again subtract a quadrant of a circle, that is, 90 parts, so that the distance from the beginning of the starry Aries may emerge, 3 sexagesimal parts, 58 scruples, 9.14.15.22. Finally, if you add the true precession of the equinox to both of these distances, you will have the distance of both from the apparent equinox, the node carrying the Moon, 4 sexagesimal parts, 25 scruples, 31.12.36.22. The northern limit, however, 5 sexagesimal parts, 55 scruples, 31.14.36.2. Therefore, the head of the Dragon of the Moon is in part 25, almost of Sagittarius: the northern limit, however, in part 25+ of Pisces. Moreover, the tail and the southern limit are always found in diametrically opposite places. 6. Digitized by Google. 1. 1: : FIRST. THERE FOLLOWS THE SUM OF THE 28TH AND 29TH PRUTENIC PRECEPTS, concerning finding the true motion of the Moon's latitude from the northern limit, and this having been found, how the true latitude of the Moon is to be further explored. First, for the assumed time, find the equal motion of the Moon's latitude. Then, have the absolute prosthaphaeresis of the Moon's first epicycle, which, as instructed in the calculation of the Moon, you will subtract from the motion of latitude if the equated anomaly of the Moon is less than a semicircle, or add to it if it exceeds a semicircle. For in this way you will complete the true motion of the Moon's latitude, which the said tables, in imitation of Ptolemy and Copernicus, deduce not from the ascending node, as in the Alphonsine Abacus, but from the northern limit. Therefore, if you were to add a quadrant of a circle to this true motion of the Moon's latitude, you would produce that arc which the Alphonsines call the argument of the Moon's latitude, truly deduced from the head of the Dragon, as they call it, through consequent signs, which the Prutenic calculation certainly does not need, by which we are taught to hunt for the true latitude of the Moon from the ecliptic through the arc of the true motion of the Moon's latitude from the northern limit. Example: for our given time, the mean motion of the Moon's latitude was found to be 5 sexagesimal parts, 27 scruples, 38.11.42.22. And the absolute prosthaphaeresis of the first epicycle, 4 parts, 42 scruples, 12 55. 2nd to be added, because the equated anomaly is greater than a semicircle. Therefore, the true motion of latitude or of the northern limit is 5 sexagesimal parts, 32 scruples, 20.137.2, by the aid of which we calculate the true latitude of the Moon from the ecliptic in the following way. When the true motion of latitude is either nothing or a full semicircle, then the Moon's latitude is maximal, namely 5 parts, indeed northern when that true motion of the Moon's latitude is nothing: but southern when that same motion completes a semicircle. But when it equals a dodrant, the Moon is entirely devoid of latitude, and holds the ascending node, from which it gradually rises northward. But when it equals a quadrant, then the Moon is similarly without latitude, and holds the descending node, from which it gradually declines southward from the solar plane. Outside these places, when the motion of the Moon's latitude is found, then the canon (Digitized by Google) 1. rya DIFFERENCE. not the full latitude of the Moon, which is found on folio 135, second column, will easily show you both the quantity and quality of the Moon's latitude. As in our example, since the true motion of latitude is 5 sexagesimal parts, 32 scruples, 20.137.22, that is, 11 dodecatemoria, 2 parts, 20 scruples, 137.28. Therefore, to this number of dodecatemoria and parts in the said Canon corresponds the northern latitude of the Moon, ascending 4 parts, 25 scruples, 18.39.2. Calculation of the true motion of the five wandering stars, namely Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury. Before all else, these four things should be at hand. 1st. The true precession of the equinoxes. 2nd. The simple equal motion: These two are assumed from the preceding. 3rd. The planet's 'allaxis', that is, its commutation, or as the Alphonsines call it, the mean argument of the planet, that is, that arc of the epicycle which extends from the mean apogee to the planet through consequent signs. 4th. The apogee of the planet in the second sense, as it is commonly spoken of, which is numbered from the first star of Aries. Therefore, if you were to add the precession of the vernal equinox to this, the apogee from the vernal equinox for the given time would become known. However, the apogee of Venus always occupies one and the same place under the fixed sphere, and is distant from the first star of Aries by 0 sexagesimal parts, 48 scruples, 21.1, according to Copernicus. These four things provide us with the full calculation of the five wandering stars. For since both the motion of the anomaly of commutation and of longitude agree with the motion of the Sun by a certain ratio and harmony, it is not necessary that, besides the simple motion of the Sun, both the motion of anomaly and of longitude of the planet be laboriously sought from tables, since one of these is sufficient. For the motion of anomaly subtracted from the mean motion of the Sun leaves the planet's equal motion in longitude, and this in the three superior planets. But the simple motions of Venus and Mercury perpetually agree with the simple motion of the Sun: for they are 'sun-runners' and 'equal-runners' and 'same-runners', as these things are copiously explained in the elements and hypotheses of motions.

[Planetary Motion and Epicycles]
If the true motion of the epicycle is such that the planet ascends from the middle, that is, from the lowest point of its small circle or epicycle to its highest point, such a position causes the argument's equation, which follows the line of the epicycle's true motion, to be subtracted from the epicycle's true motion, so that the planet's true motion remains. Therefore, it is then said to be diminished in number. But if the equated place is greater than the mean course, that is, if the planet's true motion is greater than the true motion of the epicycle's center, it will be descending from the middle, that is, from the apex or apogee of its small wheel down to its lowest point. Such a position of the planet in the descending half of the epicycle causes the argument's equation, which precedes the line of the epicycle's true motion, to be added to its true motion, so that the planet's true course emerges. Therefore, it is then said to be augmented in number, etc.

[Planetary Weakness and Elevation]
Planets are rendered weak and outside their dignities when they are placed in locations dissimilar to their nature. Hence Ptolemy, in the third book of his Apotelesmatics, discussing the future manners of nativities, says that planets are elevated above the lords of the soul's qualities primarily when those lords are weak or outside their proper and dissimilar places. Thirdly, when Saturn is in a square, or even a trine or sextile to the Sun, such that the Sun is on the right and Saturn on the left; otherwise, Saturn could not be more occidental than the Sun. For example, if the Sun is in Libra and Saturn in Capricorn. A similar effect occurs if, while the Sun travels through an obedient sign, Saturn is found in an imperious sign. For example, if the Sun is in 10 degrees of Aries and Saturn in 20 degrees of Capricorn. Fourthly, if Saturn ascends to the apogee of its eccentric while the Sun descends to its apogee. However, ascent or descent is most observed in epicycles, as we have said. Furthermore, a ponderous occidental planet is said to be elevated above the Sun or Moon, or another lighter planet, because the Sun or Moon in such a state moves towards that planet, and the superior planet never moves towards them. And just as a man who awaits others at home seems nobler than those who come to his house, so a more ponderous planet, when occidental, is said to be elevated above another, especially if one or more of the aforementioned principal conditions are present. However, do not neglect the reason for declinations, latitudes, and finally the motion of the entire world, by which stars are carried from the east to the most eminent meridian place by reason of the horizons. Always, northern declination and latitude are more efficacious and higher than southern ones. Given these conditions, Porphyry's tradition regarding the supereminence of stars, who stated that oriental stars are higher than occidental ones, can no longer hold. His words on supereminence are these: "Every star placed in the right trine or square, or in the left, and to which it approaches, overcomes. For example, a star placed in Capricorn is overcome by stars traversing Libra, Virgo, and Scorpio. Furthermore, they say that supereminences, which occur from trine or square, are more powerful than others. For a star thus elevated gains strength, whether it be benefic or malefic, and especially if it is found in an angle with this. And if it is benefic, it shows an illustrious nativity; if malefic, an obscure one. In general, every star placed to the right overcomes the left to which it is carried." This means: "Every star placed in the right trine or square, or in the left, and to which it approaches, overcomes. For example, a star placed in Capricorn is overcome by stars traversing Libra, Virgo, and Scorpio. Furthermore, they say that supereminences, which occur from trine or square, are more powerful than others. For a star thus elevated gains strength, whether it be benefic or malefic, and especially if it is found in an angle with this. And if it is benefic, it shows an illustrious nativity; if malefic, an obscure one. In general, every star placed to the right overcomes the left to which it is carried."

[Opening of the Gates]
The seventh topic is about the opening of the gates, which are so named from their great and evident effects in the surrounding heavens. There are two types of gate openings: great and small. A small opening of the gates occurs as described here, namely when an inferior planet conjoins a superior one, and their houses are opposite. Such conjunctions, if you disregard the Moon, are found to be three: The first is of Saturn and the Sun, which causes very turbulent and cold air. The second is of Jupiter and Mercury, which stirs up winds. The third is of Mars and Venus, which produces rain and lightning. Each of these three conjunctions produces three forms, namely conjunction, opposition, and square, of which opposition is the most powerful, then conjunction, which has more strength than the square. The great opening of the gates is defined thus: When the Moon, separating from an inferior planet, applies to a superior one by conjunction, opposition, or square, such that the planets to which the Moon conjoins have opposite houses, a great opening of the gate or valve occurs, in which there is a great and evident change in the air, which reflects the nature of the superior planet, and especially if the superior and inferior planets aspect each other. For example, if the Sun is in 29 degrees of Scorpio, Saturn in 29 degrees of Aquarius, and the Moon in 27 degrees of Leo. Here the Sun aspects Saturn by square and applies to it. The Moon, receding from the Sun and approaching the diameter of Saturn, opens the greatest gates from the Sun to Saturn, and makes the weather cloudy and cold, especially in those places whose cardines the Moon traverses. If such a configuration occupies watery signs, it will produce great rains, especially if Saturn dominates the cardines established at the moment of the square radiation. A nearly similar configuration occurs if the Moon, separating from Saturn, joins the Sun. For universally, the planet to which the Moon first applies is said to open the gate over it, to which the Moon, flowing away, secondly conjoins, provided they have opposite houses. However, the significance is greater if it occurs from an inferior to a superior planet, for that is truly the opening of the great valves. A smaller and shorter change in the air occurs, and the turbulence quickly changes to a tranquil state when the Moon, flowing from a ponderous planet, applies to a lighter one. The great opening of the valves occurs when the Moon separates from a planet and applies to another, or vice versa. In every lunar flow, Mercury must be particularly observed, for if it joins the planets, one of which opens the gates to the other, or if it aspects them, it will cause instability in the air and winds. And from this, Albuzic, and it is a thing that the Indians greatly observed. For they count 12 hours after the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, and apply them to the Sun, and divide the 12 hours into three parts, namely into the haim of the Sun, and they judge over all four hours according to the judgment of the lords of the triplicity of the Sun's hour of conjunction. Then they give to Venus after 12 hours, and divide them again into three, and judge over every three-part division according to the lords of the triplicity of Venus's hour of conjunction. After this, they do similarly with Mercury and other planets in succession, until the orb returns to the Sun after 84 hours, and they do not cease to do so frequently until the second conjunction arrives. And some say that Albuzic is this: that after the conjunction there are 12 unequal hours, which are called combust; and no one should begin any work in these. And after the 12 hours, there are 72 hours incombust; in which the beginning of works is useful. And after these 72 incombust hours, there are 12 combust hours similarly until the conjunction that follows. After this, they divide these 12 hours into three divisions, that is, into parts. They said that when someone began to walk or wage war in the first four hours, the loss of his soul would be feared; and in the second four hours, the loss of his body without the loss of his soul would be feared; and in the last four hours, the loss of his substance, his possessions, and everything he owns would be feared. Regarding fortunate and unfortunate hours according to the opinion of the Indian people. The Indians, he says, divide the periodic month into hours, and name the first twelve hours, which begin from the conjunction of the luminaries, the combust hours of the Sun, to which they assign the lords of the triplicity of the place of the luminaries' coitus. The first lord presides over the first third, the second over the second, and the third over the third. The following 12 hours they assign to Venus, who follows the Sun in order, and to these they assign the lords of the triplicity of the place that Venus held in the synod of the luminaries, in the same way as was said for the Sun. And so on, the following hours are distributed to the following planets, until after the lapse of 84 hours of the month, the Sun repeats its former circuit of dominion. The rest are easy. The combust hours are those that have the Sun as their lord. Likewise, they call the loss of the soul the loss of life in their manner, etc.

[Parts of the Houses and Other Parts]
The eighth house is the part of death, and it is taken day and night from the Moon to the degree and minute of the eighth house. It is added from above that Saturn has walked in its sign, projected from the beginning of Saturn's sign. The part of the planet that kills is taken by day from the lord of the ascendant degree to the degree of the Moon, and by night, conversely, etc. The part of the year in which death, poverty, impediment, and destruction are feared for the native is taken day and night from Saturn to the degree of the lord of the house of conjunction or prevention that occurred before the nativity, etc. The part of imprisonment and whether one will be freed from it or not is taken by day from Saturn to the Part of Fortune, and by night, conversely. The ninth house is the part of peregrination; it is taken day and night from the lord of the ninth house to the degree and minute of the ninth house, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of a journey by water is taken by day from Saturn to the 15th degree of the sign of Cancer, and by night, conversely, etc. If Saturn is in the 15th degree of Cancer, the degree of the part will be the degree of the ascendant. The part of religion is taken by day from the Moon to Mercury, and by night, conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The tenth house is the part of region and kingdom, and what work the native does; it is taken day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of the king and kingdom is taken by day from Mars to the Moon; by night, conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. And there is another part similar to the father of fathers. The part of work and kingdom according to Velius is taken day and night from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part signifying whether there is a cause for a kingdom or not is taken day and night from the Sun to the degree of the Midheaven, and it is projected from Jupiter. The part of Mars is taken by day from Venus to the Moon, and by night, conversely, and it is projected from the ascendant. The eleventh house is the part of friends, and it is taken day and night from the Moon to Mercury, and it is projected from the ascendant. And Alendez said that it is taken by night, conversely. The part signifying the effect of friends and friendship is taken by day from the Part of Fortune to the part of future things, and by night, conversely, etc. The twelfth house is the part of enemies according to Hermes, and it is taken day and night from the lord of the house of enemies, up to the degree and minute of the house of enemies, and it is projected from the ascendant. And according to some ancients, it is taken day and night from Saturn to Mars, etc. And these are the parts of the 12 houses, etc. These are other parts that the masters of astrological judgments use frequently. Among these is the part that signifies the falsehood of rumors, when it falls in a crooked or mutable sign, or if the lord of the house is retrograde or impeded, or if malefics aspect it or are conjoined with it. And it signifies the truth of rumors if it falls with benefics or in their houses or terms, or if they aspect it or are in a direct sign; and it is taken by day from Mercury to Venus, by night, conversely, and it is projected, etc. And according to Albumazar, by day from Mercury to the Moon, and by night, conversely, etc. The part of the reason for the profundity of sense is taken by day from Saturn to the Moon, and by night, conversely, etc. The part of wisdom and discipline is taken day and night from Saturn to Jupiter, projected, etc. The part of war and battles is taken day and night from Saturn to the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of peace and concord of armies is taken day and night from the Moon to Mercury, and it is projected from the ascendant. The part of looking in the revolution of the year is taken by day from the Moon to Venus, and by night, conversely, and it is projected from the Sun. Concerning the parts of revolutions in matters of kingdoms. And because, with God's help, we have introduced these parts that are relevant in particular matters, let us proceed to the parts that are relevant in the revolution of the years of the world and the conjunctions signifying the causes of the kingdom, its stability or duration. Among these is the part called the part of the kingdom or empire, which is exercised in the revolution of the world; and it is taken from Mars to the Moon, and it is projected from the ascendant of the conjunction that signifies the change of the kingdom. It is also taken in another way, namely, from the degree of the ascendant of the conjunction to the degree of the conjunction, and it is projected from the degree of the ascendant of the revolution. Likewise, it is done in another way: it is taken from the degree of the Midheaven of the revolution up to the Sun, and it is projected from Jupiter, i.e., from the degree of Jupiter. The part of the king's time, that is, how long it should last, is taken at the hour of the king's election from the Sun to the 15th degree of the sign of Leo, and it is projected from the Moon; then it is taken from the Moon to the 15th degree of the sign of Cancer, projected from the Sun. Another part concerning the time of the king's election: it is taken at the hour of the king's election by day from Jupiter to Saturn, and by night, conversely; it is projected from the ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the king arose. If Jupiter is in a common sign, and the revolution is divine, and Jupiter is falling from the angles, then it is taken from Saturn to Jupiter, and 30 degrees are added from above, and it is projected from the ascendant. But if Saturn and Jupiter are opposite each other, and both are falling from the ascendant, what comes between them is mediated, i.e., half of the degrees between them are taken; it is projected from the ascendant. And if Jupiter is in its exaltation, and the revolution is at night, it is counted from it to Saturn, and it is projected from the ascendant. There are two main parts from which the time of the king's election and its duration will be extracted. The first of these is to look at the hour of the king's election, when the perfection of the year arrives from the conjunction of the triplicity that signified the sect, from the number by which 30 degrees are given for each year, and for every two and a half degrees, one month. And when you know in what degree or sign it is, keep it here, because this is the place from which you will equate the first part: when you want to adapt it, you will adapt the ascendant of the revolution of the year in which the elected one arose. After this, look from the oriental planet from the Sun, from Saturn and Jupiter in that year, up to the degree of the equation of the first part that you kept; project it from the ascendant of the revolution of the year; and where the number arrives, that is the place of the first part. The second part is found thus: take at the conjunction in which the king arose or began to reign, to what sign and degree the progression of the year arrives from the number by which 30 degrees are given for each year, and two and a half degrees for each month, up to the day on which the king arose; that will be the place of the equation of the second part, also keep it. After this, look from the occidental planet from the Sun, from Saturn and Jupiter, up to the place of the equation of the second part that you kept; project it from the ascendant of the revolution: where it arrives, that will be the place of the second part. These are the parts that signify the strength of the king and his duration. There are also other parts that are used in the revolutions of the years of the world: by these, it is known what is heavy in the market, what will be light in price, or what is precious or vile, much or little; that is, you look at where the part falls, that is, in whose planetary house, exaltation, term, or triplicity: if that planet is retrograde, or combust, or in a bad place, that thing will become vile and of little value. But if it is in a place of strength, or in an angle, and especially in the Midheaven, that thing will become heavy and of great value; if the lord of the house reaches the place of its fall, that thing will become vile. And look at the aspects of the benefics and malefics to these, and also to the Moon and its lord; and see how and who aspects that part: if benefics and the Moon aspect that part, that thing will multiply, and if malefics aspect it, it will suffer detriment. The part of the disposition of the year from the Moon to Mercury. The part of water from the Moon to Venus. The part of barley from the Moon to Jupiter. The part of chickpeas, which is a kind of legume, from Venus to the Sun. The part of lentils from Mars to Saturn. The part of beans from Saturn to Mars. The part of millet from Saturn to Mars. The part of onions from Saturn to Mars. The part of wheat from the Sun to Mars. The part of nuts from Mercury to Mars. The part of sugar from Mercury to Venus. The part of dates from the Sun to Venus.

[Calculating Planetary Positions]
FIRST. 153 are applied. These four being thus constituted, subtract the equal common motion of the planet from the equal simple motion of the Sun, so that the equal motion of the planet's longitude from the head of the starry Aries may emerge, and that only in the three superior planets. For Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, as we just said, always obtain the same or common equal motion of longitude with the Sun. From this longitude motion, now ascertained, immediately subtract the Apogee of the planet in the second signification, and there will remain the Anomaly of the Eccentric, or as it is commonly called, the mean center. 1. The Prosthaphæresis or equation of the Eccentric, that is, the arc between the line of the mean and the true motion of the epicycle. This, indeed, is nothing at the apogee or perigee of the epicycle's center, but is greatest when passing through the mean longitudes. (2. Proportional minutes. If the equation of the Anomaly of the Eccentric is less than a semicircle, it subtracts from the mean motion of longitude; if greater, it adds to it, so that both may be equalized, as the titles themselves indicate. The opposite, however, must be done to obtain the true Anomaly of commutation. For they alternately exceed and are exceeded by each other, since the arcs of the equation of the Anomaly of the Eccentric and the commutation of the epicycle are proportional and similar to each other, and therefore, one being taken from the tables, the other is also obtained. Afterwards, by the commutation of the planet, 1. The Prosthaphæresis or equation of the orbit. 2. The subsequent excess, whose part corresponding to the proportional minutes must always be added to the equation of the orbit, so that the parallax or absolute equation of the orbit may emerge. And if the Anomaly of commutation is less than a semicircle, subtract the Prosthaphæresis of the orbit from the co-equated longitude, so that the true place of the star from the horn of Aries may emerge. If you add the true precession of the equinoxes to this, the true place of the planet from the apparent equinox will emerge. There follows for a given time a diagram of calculation. 12 21 True precession of the equinox. 0 27 22 21 Simple equal motion of the Sun 4° 39 27 Parallax or Anomaly of the orbit. 0 39 46 33 Apogee 4 0 33 58 Equal motion of the center of the epicycle 0 52 54 Anomaly of the eccentric 2 0 19 3 Prosthaphæresis of the anomaly of the eccentric, subtract. 5 46 49 Proportional minutes 0 415 Equated Anomaly of the Eccentric 1 54 32 14 True motion of the center of the epicycle 5 55 6 5 Co-equated Anomaly of the orbit 0 45 33 22 First Prosthaphæresis of the orbit, add. 0 3 55 58 Subsequent excess 0 26 13 Part corresponding to proportional minutes 0 0 17 57 Absolute Prosthaphæresis of the orbit, add. 0 4 13 55 Therefore, the true place from the head of Aries is 5 20 0 59 And its true place from the apparent equinox is 0 26 42 20 It therefore falls into the 26th part, 42 minutes, 1,212 seconds of Aries. Calculation 4. 12" Anomaly of the orbit 5 42 24 43 Apogee 2 38 31 27 Equal motion of the center of the epicycle 0 58 14 44 Anomaly of the eccentric 4 19 43 17 Prosthaphæresis of the anomaly of the eccentric, add. 0 5 11 10 Proportional minutes: 0 31 19 1. True motion of the center of the epicycle, 3 325 54 Equated Anomaly of the eccentric 4 24 54 27 Co-equated Anomaly of the orbit 5 37 13 33 Its Prosthaphæresis, subtract. 3 27 24 Subsequent excess 0 1 16 45 Its part corresponding to proportional minutes 0 0 8 44 Absolute Prosthaphæresis of the orbit, subtract. 9 3 36 8 Hence the distance from the head is 0 59 49 46 And its distance from the section is 1 27 12 7 Therefore, according to this calculation, it falls into the 27th part, 12 minutes, 1 second of Gemini. Calculation of Mars. 1 2 Anomaly of the orbit. 2 52 20 39 Apogee. 1 59 57 16 Equal motion of Mars 3 48 18 48 : Anomaly of the eccentric 1 48 21 32 Prosthaphæresis of the anomaly of the eccentric, subtract. 0 10 496 L Proportional minutes 1 : 29 56 Equated Anomaly of the eccentric 1 37 32 26 True motion of the center of the epicycle 3 37 29 42 Co-equated Anomaly of the orbit 3 3 9 45 Parallax of the orbit, subtract. 0 4 43 42 Subsequent excess 0 3 35 31 Part corresponding to proportional minutes, add. 0 1 47 31 Absolute parallax of the orbit, subtract. 0 6 31 13 i Distance from the head 5 3 30 58 29 And its distance from the true equinox 3 58 20 50 : Therefore, according to this calculation, it falls into the 28th part, 24 minutes, 1 second of Scorpio, approximately. Calculation of Venus. 13. 2. Commutation 43 6 13 Simple equal motion 327 40 39 27. > V2 Apogee : 0 48 21 0 Anomaly of the eccentric 5 52 18 27 Prosthaphæresis of the anomaly of the eccentric, add. 0 85 53 Proportional minutes 10 Equated Anomaly of the eccentric 5 52 34 20 True motion of the epicycle 0 40 55 20 Equated Anomaly of the orbit 42 50 20. Parallax of the orbit, add. 17 36 4 Subsequent excess 18 34 Part corresponding to proportional minutes 3. Absolute parallax of the orbit, add. 17 36 7 Distance from the head 0 58 31 27 Its distance from the equinox 1 25 53 48 Therefore, it holds the 25th part, 13 minutes, 1.48 seconds of Gemini. Calculation of Mercury. 1 2 Commutation. 2 6 27 13 Simple equal motion 0 40 39 27 Apogee 3 317 21 Anomaly of the eccentric :, .. 3 9 326 Prosthaphæresis of the anomaly of the eccentric, add. 0 3 2 58 Proportional minutes 1 52 48 True motion of the epicycle 41 12 18 Co-equated Anomaly of the eccentric 3 10 4 57 Co-equated Anomaly of the orbit 2 5 54 22 Parallax of the orbit, add. 0 18 6 26 Subsequent excess 0 5 8 14 Part corresponding to proportional minutes 0 4 31 14 Absolute parallax of the orbit. 22 37 40 Distance from the head 1 3 49 58 Its distance from the equinox 1 31 12 19 • Therefore, it has the 1st part, 12 minutes, 14 seconds of Cancer, approximately, which motion differs by more than two whole parts from the calculation of the ephemerides derived from the Alphonsine tables. We could have omitted the co-equation of the anomaly of the eccentric when calculating the stars' motion in longitude. However, we have everywhere added this co-equation because, through the co-equated anomaly of the eccentric and the absolute anomaly of commutation, besides many other things to be explained elsewhere, the latitudes of the five wandering stars must also be calculated according to precepts 81 and 82 of Prutenic. Thus, in our example, the latitude is calculated in this way: Saturn's southern latitude, descending from the apogee of the eccentric, is approximately 2 parts, 4 minutes, 12,20,22 seconds. Jupiter's southern latitude, ascending, is 0 parts, 28 minutes, 12,272 seconds. Mars' southern latitude, descending, is 0 parts, 52 minutes, 12,17,22 seconds. Venus' northern latitude, ascending, is 0 parts, 39 minutes, 12,14,3 seconds. Mercury's northern latitude, descending, is 1 part, 46 minutes, 12 seconds. Finally, you will find the true places of the fixed stars, both in longitude and latitude, as follows: From their canonical description, the star's longitude from the head of the starry Aries must be extracted, and then the true precession of the vernal equinox must be added to this longitude, so that the star's longitude from the apparent equinox may emerge in parts. If we divide these parts by 30, we will easily discover in which dodecatemorion and in which part of it the star is located. For example, let us find the part of the sky in which Lampadias, called Palilicium by the Romans, is located at a given time of birth. Its longitude from the head of Aries in the constellation Taurus is noted as 36 parts. Its southern latitude is 5 parts, 10 minutes, 1 second, which never changes in fixed stars, and therefore needs no further correction. But the true precession of the equinox, found above, is 27 parts, 22 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds. Therefore, this, combined with the star's longitude, makes 63 parts, 22 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds, which, divided by 30, yields two signs with 3 parts, 22 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds. Therefore, Palilicium falls into the 3rd part, 22 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds of Gemini. Likewise, Basiliscos, that is, Regulus, has a longitude from the head of Aries of 115 parts, 50 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 0 parts, 10 minutes, 12 seconds. Adding the true precession of the equinox to the star's longitude, you will produce its distance from the apparent equinox of 143 parts, 12 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds, which, divided by 30, makes 4 dodecatemoria, with 23 parts, 12 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds remaining. Therefore, Regulus falls at the given time into the 23rd part, 12 minutes, 12,21,22 seconds of Leo. Similarly, the true longitudinal places of the other fixed stars can be calculated. Finally, when you insert the exactly calculated places of the stars into the celestial chart, consider which celestial stations complete the dodecatemoria in which the stars are located. For each star must be described in the houses whose cusps embrace the parts of the dodecatemoria in which it is located.

[Parts of Various Things]
The Part of Honey from the Moon to the Sun. The Part of Rice (which is a kind of grain) from Jupiter to Saturn. The Part of Olives from Mercury to the Moon. The Part of Grapes from Saturn to Venus. The Part of Cotton from Mercury to Venus. The Part of Alonica (a kind of white seed, similar to flaxseed, used by doctors to make a useful ointment) from Mercury to Jupiter, or from Saturn to Venus. The Part of Melons (which are large and yellow) from Mercury to Saturn. The Part of Sour Foods from Saturn to Mars. The Part of Sweet Foods from the Sun to Venus. The Part of Foods with the taste of celery or similar herbs from Mars to Saturn. The Part of Bitter Foods from Mercury to Saturn. The Part of Sharp Medicines from Saturn to Jupiter. The Part of Salty Medicines from Mars to the Moon. The Part of Poisonous Medicines from Genzahar (that is, from the Head of the Dragon) to Saturn. And all these are to be cast from the Ascendant of the year's revolution. These are all the Parts that have come down to us. We have also introduced these very last Parts, even if their narration is weak, so that we might not omit anything that could be introductory to the mastery of astrological judgments. Friends: Table of friendship and enmity of the signs. 447 2 x II Enemies. Digitized by Google. FIFTH. 149. ON THE FIFTH DIFFERENCE. Ptolemy removes natural effects from dodecatemoria, novenaries, Parts, and other such non-natural but artificial divisions of the zodiac. For he calls them 'arithmos kai anaitiologeta' (numbers and uncaused). And Alcabitius himself testifies that the signification of the Parts is very weak. Having therefore set forth in order, as he promised, all the necessary precepts by which the natures of the parts of the sky, the temperaments of the stars, and other affections are contained, and all the variety and force of the terms of this divine art are explained: now in the last part of his Isagoge, he enumerates in order and strictly the principles of all the Parts or Lots, from which they originate, and the ends into which they terminate, lest it seem to anyone that he has left anything pertaining to the elements of this part of Mathematics. First, he collects the Parts of nativities, and then those of the Revolutions of the years of the world. But before all else, he delivers a general rule, by the guidance of which one can easily know all the Lots of any celestial chart. Having known, he says, the places, that is, the beginning and end of any Lot, inquire into the arc or intermediate degrees: having found these, cast them from the Ascendant or other places that will be indicated, that is, starting from the Ascendant or the degree of another place, count the subsequent degrees until that sum of intercepted degrees is finished. For in whatever degree it finishes, that degree will show the place of the sought Lot. He explains this rule with the example of the Part of Fortune, which he instructs to be collected by day from the place of the Sun to the Moon, but by night from the Moon to the Sun. For example: in a diurnal nativity, let the ninth degree of Aries ascend, with the Sun in 8 degrees 54 minutes of Leo, and the Moon in 24 degrees of Capricorn. If you proceed by counting through the subsequent signs from the Sun to the Moon, you will find that the Moon is 169 degrees distant from the Sun. Now, proceed from the horoscope, that is, from the 9th degree of Aries, counting through the subsequent signs until the sum of 169 degrees ends: it will end in 28 degrees of Virgo, which will be the place of the Part of Fortune. Therefore, if the luminaries are in the same degree of the sky, the horoscope will share the Part of Fortune. Let there be again a nocturnal nativity, in which we imagine the places of the luminaries and the same 9th degree of Aries to ascend. If you now proceed from the Moon to the Sun through the succeeding signs, you will find the Moon to be 131 degrees distant from the Sun, which if you extend from the Ascendant counting through the subsequent signs, you will find the place of the Part of Fortune to be in the 20th degree of Libra. Digitized by Google. 470. DIFFERENCE. So that this calculation of Parts may be easier and more expeditious, resolve the places from which and to which the Parts extend, such as the places of the seven planets, the Ascendant, the second, eighth, ninth, midheaven, twelfth houses; also the places of the Part of Fortune and the Part of Spirit, and the Sun and Moon, which immediately preceded the figure, into numbers of signs, degrees, and minutes: having done this, subtract the place from which the author instructs the progression to begin from the place to which it is to be continued, accommodating a full revolution or 12 signs, as often as the subtraction cannot be performed, and add what remains to the signs, degrees, and minutes of the place from which it is to be cast, so that the true place of the sought Lot may emerge. In this way, we will subtract the place of the Sun from the place of the Moon in diurnal nativities, and what remains of the signs, degrees, and minutes, we will add to the Ascendant, and we will produce the true place of the Part of Fortune. As in our example of a diurnal nativity, the place of the Ascendant is 6 signs, 26 degrees, 44 minutes. The place of the Sun in 8 degrees, 54 minutes of Leo, resolved, makes 2 signs, 8 degrees, 54 minutes. The place of the Moon in 27 degrees, 52 minutes of Capricorn, resolved, makes 10 signs, 27 degrees, 52 minutes. From these, the motion subtracted leaves 8 signs, 18 degrees, 58 minutes, which joined to the eastern cardinal point, which has 6 signs, 26 degrees, 44 minutes, produce 3 signs, 15 degrees, 42 minutes, and demonstrate the place of the Part of Fortune to fall in 15 degrees, 42 minutes of Cancer. Conversely, if it had been a nocturnal genesis, then the place of the Moon, that is, 10 signs, 27 degrees, 52 minutes, would have to be subtracted from the place of the Sun, that is, 2 signs, 8 degrees, 54 minutes: which done, there would remain 3 signs, 11 degrees, 2 minutes, which joined with the horoscope, that is, 6 signs, 26 degrees, 44 minutes, make 10 signs, 7 degrees, 48 minutes, and project the place of the Part of Fortune into 7 degrees, 48 minutes of Aquarius. Ptolemy instructs that the place of the Part of Fortune is always to be collected by day and night from the Sun to the Moon. His words in Book 3, Chapter 'Of the Times of Life', are these: "The Lot of Fortune, the number collected from the degrees, both by day and by night, from the Sun to the Moon, and subtracting the same from the horoscope according to the succeeding signs of the zodiac, where the number falls, that degree and dodecatemoria, and that place, we say, holds the Lot of Fortune, so that it has the same ratio and configuration to the ascending horizon as the Moon has to the Lot of Fortune, and is as it were a lunar horoscope." From these words, the reason is also clear why the Part of Fortune is deservedly attributed an effect by Ptolemy, because, namely, it is as it were a lunar horoscope, and with the same or a similar ray with which the Sun, which is the vital source, illuminates the horoscope, so also the Moon, the source of natural power, illuminates the Part of Fortune: which signifies external things and external accidents, whence it is also called the Part of Fortune. This is the reason for the Lot, which can have no place in other planets, because they are neither luminaries nor do they reflect the light of the Sun. Therefore, in the examination of Lots, it seemed to me neither necessary nor useful to dwell here any longer. Glory to God. Errors are thus corrected. Fol. 3, line 32, read 'tosanikō'. Fol. 4, line 3, read 23. 1. Fol. 5, line 20, read 'Lioti'. Fol. 6, line 17, 'trigono, sexagono': and line 19, 'seorsim'. Fol. 8, last line, 'sex sunt'. Fol. 12, line 34, for 'dextra' read 'sinistra', and subsequently for 'sinistra', 'dextra'. Fol. 13, line 17, 'quinque'; and line 30, for 'uni', read 'uno'. Fol. 15, line 2, 'dilaniat': and line 29, 'hēgemonika', and subsequently 'Asterismi'. Fol. 16, line 6, read 'denu quater': and line 11, 'Cassiope': and 33, read 'rota'. Fol. 17, where the characters of the spaces of the sky are explained, for these numerical notes 1.2.3.4. placed to the right and to the left, read 12.22.34.48. And line 29, read 'hypo gōn'. Fol. 20, line 29, these words (capite de signis competentib.) should be omitted or transferred to the margin. Fol. 21, line 28, 'synezetazomenōn'. Fol. 26, line 13, for the character of Aquarius, read Capricorn. Fol. 27, line 19, read 'Lunae interuentu Solem occultari'. Fol. 28, line 12, 'quae est 100. ad 1'. Fol. 35, line 28, 'veluti Mars in Capric.': and line 31, 'leuiusculu'. Fol. 38, line 6, 'hypsōma': and line 31, for the sign of Leo, read Cancer. Fol. 41, in the scheme of dignities under the title Detrimenta, from the rule of the sign Capricorn for Saturn, read Luna. And there under the title Casus, the character of Saturn is to be depressed in one place, and placed from the rule of the sign Aries. Fol. 52, the scheme of aspects will be completed by describing the opposite sign next to the letter F, and by drawing triangular radiations C.R. and E.B. For example, read 'qui p quae'. Fol. 53, line 27, read 'minus'. Fol. 55, line 12, 'a sexu mascul. & foeminino'. Fol. 56, line 26, 'pponendi': and line 33, read 'partilis'. Fol. 59, line 6, 'iokratōra'.

[Planetary Powers and House Meanings]
177 are worthy, except among the more northerly. Secondly, we consider not the light proper to the houses, but the powers that the stars acquire in their individual stations, about which Ptolemy wrote at the end of the fourth book of his Apotelesmatics. In that place, as we noted above, he wants the power and quality of the stars to be judged from these four things. First, from the star's own inherent nature. Secondly, from the inherent nature of the dodecatemoria in which they are located. Thirdly, from the natural disposition of their configuration, that is, whether they are oriental or occidental, and whether they are swift or slow in their course, which accident we have always referred to their own orbits rather than to the Sun. Fourthly, from the natural disposition of their configurations to the angles. The three former modes of powers will be discussed elsewhere. Only the fourth mode contributes to the explanation of the present topic, and Ptolemy commanded judgment concerning it in these words: "The qualities of each star are to be sought from its position, or rather its relation to the horizon, in this manner. For in the midheaven, or in the place succeeding it, they are most powerful. They have a second degree of power in the eastern horizon and the place succeeding it. But they are more powerful in the horizon, and less so in the imum coeli, or in a place otherwise configured to the eastern horizon. But found outside all these, they are considered weak and utterly infirm." Cardan thus explains these words: "The first place is occupied by the heart of the sky, then the eleventh or first and succeeding or second, then the seventh, then the eighth." He seems, he says, to attribute powers to the imum coeli and the fifth and ninth places. To me, however, this not only seems so, but I also state it for certain, since the words themselves mean the same thing. He understands the places excluded from the eastern horizon to be the twelfth, sixth, and also the third, because it is below the earth and cadent. The twelfth and eighth places are also excluded from the ascendant: but these, as has been said, have power by themselves due to the abundance of light, even if they are not configured to the ascendant. Indeed, the eighth always surpasses the ninth in power, except in the matter of life, in which, according to Ptolemy, as we shall see in its proper place, the ninth precedes the eighth, because it is in a trine radiation of the ascendant and is sublime, and the Sun existing there produces the greatest heat. After these, Cardan orders the sixth place, then the fourth, which, although it has no power by itself, as stated above, yet the planets constituted there, when they illuminate all the cardines with very strong rays, acquire great powers. From this it can be understood that the fourth place, being deprived of all light, is indeed weaker by itself than the twelfth or sixth, but is stronger than them if a comparison is made to the planets, etc. Thirdly, the places of the sky are considered as they are connected by a certain familiarity and sympathy with inferior things. For just as in the essential distribution of the zodiac, or rather of the entire sky, we said that the dodecatemorion of Aries is particularly associated with Germany, Leo with Italy, etc., and Saturn with the spleen, Venus with the genitals, Mercury with the tongue, etc., so in this fortuitous partition of the zodiac, we say that certain places agree with certain inferior things by a peculiar familiarity. For example, only places illuminated by light favor life, as will be seen below, namely the tenth, first, seventh, eleventh, and ninth places. For even if the twelfth and eighth places are in light and signify life, they cannot communicate so much power to a planet constituted there that it can moderate the life of the native, much less, by Hercules, will the second place be able to accomplish this, although it exercises principal power and authority in other matters: as in the matter of riches, the second place is preferred not only to the eighth and twelfth, but also to all others. And the same is more potent in honors than the others, except for the angles and the eleventh and ninth. Similarly, each of the remaining houses respects individual things inherent in the body or mind, or coming from elsewhere, and affects them peculiarly by consent. Moreover, in the accommodation of these things to the domiciles of the sky, the Author and the other Arabs do not agree with Ptolemy in all things, but dissent in many. For example, Ptolemy judges the status of the father principally from the position of the Sun, and that of the mother from the position of Venus. On the contrary, the Arabs principally infer matters concerning the father from the fourth house and its lord. To this they then add, in a diurnal nativity, the consideration of the Sun, and in a nocturnal nativity, the consideration of Saturn, and besides these, the planet or planets placed in the fourth house. Likewise, they command the Part of Fortune of the father and its lord to be contemplated. Similarly, they take their principal conjectures concerning the mother's affairs from the midheaven and its lord. Hence, also taking into account the diurnal or nocturnal condition. Finally, from the planets occupying the tenth house, and from the Part of Fortune of the mother and its rulers: all such places Ptolemy scorned in his treatise on parents, and made no mention of them, and transferred this entire conjecture to the luminaries, Saturn, and Venus. Indeed, Ptolemy wrote in the third book of his Apotelesmatics, chapter on twins, that twins or more are born if the luminaries and the ascendant possess bicorporeal signs, or indeed if, with the luminaries, not the angle of the ascendant, but in its place the culmination of the midheaven falls into bicorporeal signs, such mothers usually give birth to twins or more. From this statement of Ptolemy, it seems to follow that he wanted the tenth house to be that of the mother. Hence, they seem to have judged the imum coeli to belong to the father. But this is not sufficiently clear: for if the tenth belongs to the mother, it does not immediately follow that the fourth, below the earth, belongs to the father. To this, since Ptolemy in the said place conjectures about the number of children, the tenth house will be much more rightly accommodated to children than to the mother for such a reason, especially since he himself in the fourth book of the Apotelesmatics attributed the tenth place to children: but in the treatise on the mother, he made no mention of the tenth place. Similarly, the Arabs ascribed many things to the other houses contrary to Ptolemy's opinion, and many things also pertaining to vain questions, the commemoration of which and comparison to Ptolemaic doctrine we will now omit for the sake of brevity, and will at least explain by example, as in the chapter on children.

[Planetary Dignities and Almuten]
DIFFERENCE 192: Saturn, however, because of the reason of his exaltation, has four powers there, and by reason of his triplicity, three; finally, by reason of his terms, two, collecting in total nine powers, and by this prerogative he surpasses not only Venus but also all other planets. Therefore, in this example, the Lord of the Ascendant is Venus, and the Ruler is Saturn, who will be the principal dominator of the matter for the author, if that degree in which the planet obtains rulership pertains to the house that signifies the matter in question, especially if it also obtains the same rulership in other places signifying the same matter. For whatever planet obtains the greatest number of dignities collected together in the places of all the significators of a certain matter, is called the principal dominator of the matter and the Almuten of the significators by the Arabs. The author makes that planet a participant in the signification which contains the nature of the matter in question. Therefore, if (to use the author's example) the Part of Aries 5 falls on the cusp of the second house of a diurnal nativity, and the Part of Substance falls on Leo 10, and finally the Part of Fortune falls on Sagittarius 6: then the Sun, because it has exaltation and the right of triplicity on the cusp of the same second house, in the place of the Part of Substance, and indeed the house and trigon; and finally obtains the trigon in the place of the Part of Fortune, surpassing all other planets by the multitude and sum of testimonies it collects in the said places, will be the principal significator of substance, and its participant in signification will be Jupiter, who by his nature signifies substance and lawful gains. Thus, the significator of a kingdom is he who has more powers or dignities in the Midheaven and other places signifying the same thing; its co-significator is the Sun, because by its nature it signifies a kingdom. For individual things in nature, as shown above, are signified not only by the signs of the zodiac and celestial domiciles, but are also distributed to individual planets. In this way, Saturn rules fathers, old men, monks, agriculture, hidden treasures, and things acquired through long journeys and with difficulty. Jupiter, however, has religious prelates, kings and leaders, substance and gains: Mars has barbers, surgeons, doctors, lictors, executioners, butchers, bakers, soldiers, who are commonly called martial. Similarly, other stars have their significations in these and many other persons and things, as described by the author in the following difference. But most collect the dominator, or as the Arabs call it, the Almuten, not only from dominion in the places of the zodiac, familiarity connected to the type of question, but also they add to these the dominions of the places in which the co-significators are found. In all these places, they call the planet that surpasses the other planets in the number of votes the Almuten of the significators of a certain matter. For example, if the Almuten of the significators of substance or wealth is to be investigated, these places of the zodiac must be considered: the place of the second house, and the place of its lord; the place of the natural co-significator of wealth, which is always Jupiter; the place of the Part of Fortune, and the place of its lord; the place of the Part of Substance, and the place of its lord; finally, the three places of the triplicities of the second house. In all these places, they call the planet that excels all others in the multitude of testimonies the Almuten of the significators of substance, and they add to it as a participant in signification another planet which, although inferior in strength, approaches the Almuten most closely in the number of testimonies among all the others. But here we approve the method of Ptolemy, of which we will make mention in the second difference at an opportune place, since we have been sufficiently prolix in the exposition of this place. CONCERNING THE ACCIDENTAL POWERS of the planets. Among the accidental powers of the planets is also Alhaiz, that is, similarity. And this is when a diurnal planet is above the earth by day, and below the earth by night; and a nocturnal planet is above the earth by night, and below the earth by day, and with this, if a masculine planet is in a masculine sign, and a feminine planet in a feminine sign, it is said to be in its similarity, that is, in its Alhaiz. And its strength will be like the strength of a man in the place of his progress, that is, of acquisition and fortune. The last chapter of the Author, which is entitled: On the accidental powers of the planets, is not the beginning of the narration concerning the adventitious strengths of the stars, since those things which are said concerning the stars in their various positions in the sky are also rightly referred to the accidental powers of the planets: but it is rather a continuation of such a narration, which the words themselves also indicate. Among the accidental powers of the planets, he says, is Haiz, as if to say, to the other accidental powers of the stars mentioned above, that property of the stars which agrees with the time is also referred. For a star agreeing with the time is called Haiz by the Arabs. For example: Two places, one of which is of the Sun, the other of Saturn, are called family fathers, or significators of the father. If, therefore, it is a diurnal nativity, the place congruent with the time, or Haiz, will be the Sun; but if nocturnal, Saturn. He says that a planet is found in its Haiz, or in its similarity, in three ways. First, by reason of the sex of the signs, namely, when a masculine planet is in a masculine sign, and a feminine planet in a feminine sign. Secondly, by reason of the feminine or masculine quarters. Thirdly, according to the agreement of the temperatures of the time and the stars. But that in the night diurnal planets prefer a position below the earth to a position above the earth; and that in the day nocturnal planets prefer a position below the earth to a position above the earth, lacks all reason, and contradicts the most true opinion of Ptolemy, who universally wished stars, both diurnal and nocturnal, placed above the earth to always be more efficacious, so that even diurnal stars constituted above the earth during nocturnal time receive greater strength than if they are carried through the lower hemisphere at the same time. For every star rejoices in its like, as far as it pertains to its congruent nature, so that nocturnal stars are better tempered by the night, and diurnal stars by the day. Therefore, a diurnal planet will be better by day than by night, and a nocturnal planet obtains a more convenient temperament by night than by day. Such a sympathy or augmentation of temperatures cannot arise from the star's stay above or below the earth. For all rejoice in the place above the earth, and in it they become better and stronger. Indeed, neither is it consonant with truth what he says, that masculine planets assume strength in masculine signs and quarters: and feminine planets in feminine signs and quarters, since all are weakened and made stronger by the Sun and the masculine places of the signs. End of the First Difference.

[Fixed Stars in Aries and Taurus]
The other's longitude is 28 parts with a half, and its northern latitude is 8 parts. There are also two stars in the head of Aries of the fifth magnitude, of the nature of Venus and a little Saturn, of which the more northern's longitude is 31 parts with a half, having a northern latitude of 7 parts. The more southern's longitude is 23 parts and a half, with a northern latitude of 6 parts. Those located in the hind foot are: in the tail, Venus. The constellation of Taurus consists of notable stars. And those four stars which are in the section or cutting off of Taurus, are all of the fourth magnitude, and have a similar mixture to Venus and a little Saturn, that is, they are cold and moist. Of these, the most northern today is precisely 47 parts distant from the vernal intersection, with a southern latitude of 6 parts. The next after it has a longitude of 46 parts, 40 minutes, 13 seconds, with a southern latitude of 7 parts, 15 minutes, 1 second. The third's longitude is 45 parts, its southern latitude is 8 parts, 30 minutes, 1 second. The fourth's longitude is 45 parts, 10 minutes, 1 second, with a southern latitude of 9 parts, 15 minutes, 1 second. On the back of Taurus, which are called Atarage by the Babylonians, in Greek Pleiades from 'plein' (to sail), because by their rising they indicate the time for navigation: in Latin they are called Vergiliae, because they rise at the end of spring when summer begins. They are also called Atlantides, because they are the seven daughters of Atlas, among whom Maia is the mother of Mercury, and not rarely is taken for all of them. Virgil in the Georgics, concerning the sowing of wheat: "Many began before the setting of Maia, but the expected harvest deluded them with empty ears." Six stars of this constellation are seen, but the seventh, because one of the daughters of Atlas mingled with a mortal, is scarcely perceived by the senses, as the German verses of Caesar in the interpretation of Aratus warn: "Seven are said to be in number, but one is snatched away, the eye failing to distinguish small bodies." Of these, the preceding has a longitude of 52 parts, 50 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 4 parts, 30 minutes, 13 seconds. The middle one's longitude is 53 parts, 10 minutes, 12 seconds, northern latitude 4 parts, 40 minutes, 1 second. But the following and last has a longitude of 54 parts, 20 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 5 parts, 20 minutes, 1 second. All are of the fifth magnitude, and are benefic stars: indeed, as Ptolemy relates, they follow the nature of the Moon and Jupiter, that is, they are very humid and hotter than the Moon, but colder than Jupiter. If therefore a cluster of stars at the hour of birth should appear with the ascendant, it will make the native great and famous, especially if it radiates to them: for then he will be pleasing to princes, and will lead an army, but nevertheless will finally perish by a bad death, having offended a prince. For notable fixed stars have significant indications of fortune in human nativities, if they are found in the angles and especially in the ascendant or Midheaven, with the Sun or Moon, or with the Part of Fortune, they decree the greatest felicity, but often with a calamitous outcome. Therefore, the great gifts of the fixed stars are neither sufficiently stable nor sufficiently reliable, unless they are confirmed by the suffrage of the wandering stars, as Hermes warns in his 29th statement: "The fixed stars bring irrational and admirable felicities, which nevertheless they mostly mark with calamities, unless the planets also agree to the felicity." Furthermore, to relate more about the Pleiades as more notable stars, although they are benefic, nevertheless whoever has them struck by malefics in the western angle at the time of their rising, will die by shipwreck. But if benefic stars look upon them thus constituted, they will nevertheless threaten the native with sudden death from intemperance and an afflux of phlegm. Likewise, if anyone has the Moon void of light in the Pleiades, or hostilely struck by them, they say the native will be deprived of sight. But now let us also examine the other stars of the constellation. The stars around the Pleiades are of the nature of the Moon and a little Jupiter. In the face or head of Taurus is located another cluster of stars, which the ancient Latins called Succulae, for 'sus' (pig) means the same to them. But the Greeks named them Hyades from 'hyein' (to rain), because they do not rise without rain. Of these, one huge and reddish star shining in the very eye of Taurus, called Aldebaran in Chaldean, Lampadias in Greek, and Palilicium in Latin, is of the nature of Mars and of the first magnitude. It belongs to the third part with a third of the dodecatemory of Gemini. Its southern latitude is 5 parts, 10 minutes, 1 second. Finally, in the highest horns are Martian stars. Castor and Pollux are thought to be Gemini. Some wish them to be Apollo and Hercules. Thus, the bright star in the head of the preceding Gemini, called the star of Apollo or Castor, has a longitude of 104 parts, that is, it belongs to the 14th part of the dodecatemory of Cancer. Its latitude is 9 parts with a half, and it is of the second magnitude, of the nature of Mercury. The other star shining in the head of the following Gemini is named Hercules, also Pollux. It has a longitude of 107 parts, 10 minutes, 13 seconds, with a northern latitude of 6 parts, 15 minutes, 1 second, and is of the second magnitude and of the nature of Jupiter. Ptolemy's words about these stars are these: "The two bright stars in the heads, the one in the preceding has a similar appearance to Mercury, and is also called Apollo, and the one in the following is called Hercules. Of the rest, those in the feet have shared a quality similar to Venus and a little Saturn, and the bright ones in the thighs are like Jupiter." In the breast of Cancer is found a nebulous cluster, called Praesepe. This was once in the dodecatemory of Cancer, but today its middle has advanced to the end of the first part of the dodecatemory of Leo. It has a northern latitude of 0 parts, 40 minutes. And it is nebulous, of the nature of Mars and the Moon. Of the two following and placed on either side, which are called Asini, the northern one has a longitude of precisely 121 parts, like Praesepe, with a northern latitude of 2 parts, 40 minutes, 1 second. But the southern Asinus has a longitude of 122 parts, with a southern latitude of only ten minutes. Both are of the fourth magnitude, of the nature of Mars and the Sun. The stars in the eyes of Cancer are like Mars and Venus, and a little Mercury. Those which are in the arms or claws resemble the nature of Saturn and Mercury. In the head of Leo are two stars of the third magnitude, of the nature of Jupiter and a little Mars, but the more northern has a longitude of 135 parts, with a northern latitude of 12 parts. The southern one has a longitude of 134 parts, 50 minutes, 12 seconds, that is, it falls into 14 parts, 50 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 9 parts, 30 minutes, 12 seconds. Three in the neck are Saturnine and a little Martian. Of these, the first has a longitude of 140 parts, 50 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 11 parts, of the third magnitude. The middle one is of the second magnitude, and has a longitude of 142 parts, 50 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 8 parts, 30 minutes, 1 second. The third has a longitude of 141 parts, 20 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 4 parts, 20 minutes, 1 second, and is of the third magnitude. In the middle of the constellation of Leo shines a bright star of the first magnitude, of the nature of Mars and Jupiter, which is commonly called Cor Leonis and Regulus, the Latins call it Regia, the Greeks Basiliskos, and it is in the 23rd part, 10 minutes, 18 seconds of the dodecatemory of Leo, with a northern latitude of only ten minutes. This is believed to be the most efficacious of all stars in the sky, because existing near the Ecliptic, it is greatly aided by the light of the Sun. Therefore, those who have it in the ascendant or placed in the Midheaven at the time of birth with the waxing Moon, will be promoted to great wealth and great empires. However, whenever the Sun and Moon reach it, it will stir up quarrels and contentions and serious wars for him. Those in the loins, and the bright one in the tail, are like Venus and Saturn. Those in the thighs are Venerean and a little Mercurial. Moreover, the one that shines at the end of the tail is of the first magnitude, and has a longitude of 165 parts, 10 minutes, 1 second, that is, it is in the 15th part, 10 minutes, 1 second of the dodecatemory of Virgo, with a northern latitude of 11 parts, 50 minutes, 19 seconds. Among the unformed stars around Leo, between its extremities and the Great Bear, the nebulous involutions which they call Coma Berenices are to be diligently noted. For the Moon, when it conjoins with these, is accustomed to wonderfully afflict the eyes of natives, as Ptolemy wrote in Book 3 of his Apotelesmata, chapter on injuries and bodily affections. Their position in our age is as follows: The luminous one, which looks most to the north, has a longitude of 165 parts, 30 minutes, 1 second, with a northern latitude of 30 parts. Of the obscure ones...

[Fixed Stars and Their Natures]
SECOND. 204 of the second magnitude, having a longitude of p.215.30 with a northern latitude of p.44.36. VII. The Kneeler (Hercules) contains stars similar to Mercury. The Lyra, which is obscured by various names: for they call it Chelin, Fidicula, Tympanum, Falcon, Vulture falling, and the Chaldeans call it Asange, has stars of the nature of Venus and Mercury. VIII. The Bird, swan or hen, in Greek nun or oenis, has stars of the nature of Venus and Mercury. Some of our people call this constellation IX. the stork. The Bird. X. Cassiopeia contains stars of the nature of Venus and Saturn. XI. Perseus has stars of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn. That Gyrus in the hilt of the sword is Martian and Mercurial. In Perseus' left hand and in Medusa's head is a shining star worthy of observation, of the second magnitude, of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn, in the part of the dodecatemory of Taurus 205 with a northern latitude of p.13, which by the Babylonians is called Algol, by the Greeks Gorgonion, by us the Head of the Gorgon or Medusa, and because of its misfortune and destruction it is called Kakodaimon. It seems, however, that the fable, which says that Medusa's head was cut off by Perseus with a sword, is not inappropriately applied to this constellation, because, as Hermes declared in proposition 73, whoever is born with the Sun conjoined to the Gorgon's head, either by body or aspect, will be struck by an axe or sword, and his head will be cut off, if this dire conjunction of the Gorgon and the Sun is not aspected by a benefic star, nor do benefics protect the eighth house, which is of death, and the lord of the sign in which the conditional luminary is found is opposed to Mars, or strikes him from a square. Some understand this statement about Mars, that is, that Mars is found with the Gorgon, which also does not displease Pontano. For they are the authors of cruel and violent deaths. Moreover, it is almost an aphorism in Astrology, that whoever has Mars and Saturn in the eighth house, especially if a bad aspect of Saturn is added, or if they are with the head of Medusa, usually perish by violent death. Finally, the Greek text also names not the Sun, but Mars. If Mars is with the head of the Gorgon, not aspected by a benefic, nor is the benefic in the eighth house, and the lord of the conditional light is opposed to Mars, he will be beheaded; if the Moon is with the head of the Gorgon, his body will be burned; if it is conjoined to the tenth house, his hands or feet will be cut off. XII. Auriga. Hemochus or Auriga, also Erichtonius: In his left shoulder is a bright star of the first magnitude, called Capella, also by authors Capra Olevia from Olevus, a city of Arcadia, where they believe she was nourished. Ovid. The rainy sign of Olevia, Capella, is born. The Kids are referred to the 15th part of the dodecatemory of Cancer with a northern latitude of p.221. And in the palm of his right hand are two stars of the fourth magnitude, which are called Phoi, that is, the Kids, of which the preceding is in the 12th part of the dodecatemory of Gemini. The following is in the 13th part of the same. The northern latitude of both is part 18. The Kids are frequently mentioned by authors. Theocritus in Hodoiporia: "May there be a good voyage for the noble lord to Mitylene, even when the South Wind drives the moist waves at the setting of the Kids, and when the season is on the ocean." He wishes his friend a happy voyage to Mitylene even in an unfortunate and very turbulent sign, when, namely, the South Wind harasses the sea at the cosmic setting of Orion and the achronical rising of the Kids, who rise with the beginning of Taurus in Alexandria. Therefore, in October in the evening, as the Kids descend from the region, they emerge achronically: and therefore the poet calls them asterias, that is, appearing in the evening. As for the temperature of the bright stars of this constellation, it is of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. XIII. Serpens. Ophiuchus, the Serpent-bearer, has stars of the nature of Saturn. The serpent of Ophiuchus itself has stars of the same nature as XIV. Sagitta. Hercules' Arrow has stars imitating the nature of Mars and Saturn. XVI. Aquila. The Eagle, or as later authors called it, the flying Vulture, has Martian and Jovian stars. XVII. Delphinus. To this they adapt the fable or history of Arion the Lyric Poet. XVIII. Equisectio, or the first horse, protome, equuleus, which has bright stars, are of the nature of Mars and Venus. Pegasus, the winged horse, or the second horse, or the greater, has the same nature. Ovid in his Fasti relates that this horse was born from the blood that flowed from Medusa's severed head: "It is believed that from the blood of the slain Medusa's pregnant neck, Pegasus sprang forth from her scattered hair." He also writes that it was winged, and finally placed among the stars. XX. Andromeda, daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia, consists of Venus's stars. Some have called her chained: whose liberator Perseus holds the Gorgon's head in his left hand, and in his right. Finally, the Triangle has stars that are the same as XXI. the tenth. XV. Southern Asterisms. I. Cetus, hostile to Andromeda, which some call the marine Lion, some the bear, and some finally the Fish and Whale, is composed of Saturnine stars. II. The ancient Latins call Orion Lingula, and some call him the strongest. His stars are located in his shoulders and are similar. Moreover, the reddish star that shines in his right shoulder is of the first magnitude, and belongs to the 22nd part of Gemini with a southern latitude of p.17. That which is in his left shoulder is of the second magnitude, and belongs to the 11th part of Gemini with a southern latitude of p.174. The other bright stars of this constellation imitate Jupiter and Mars. In the belt or girdle of Orion, three notable stars of the second magnitude shine: the longitude of the preceding is p.76 with a southern latitude of p.24. The longitude of the middle is p.78 with a southern latitude of p.245. Finally, the longitude of the following in a straight line is p.80 with a southern latitude of p.25. In the left foot shines a bright star of the first magnitude, having a longitude of p.694 with a southern latitude of p.311. III. Eridanus or the river, also called the Nile, has at its extremity a bright star of the first magnitude, and is of the nature of Jupiter, and falls into the 20th part of the dodecatemory of Aries or the Nile.

[Lunar Qualities and Malefics/Benefics]
It could not be otherwise than that in the Moon, humidity would significantly exceed heat, since the humid is cast down by a double heat, namely its own and the Sun's, while the hot is cast down only by the Sun's heat. But someone might ask, since the Moon, when full of light, does not mitigate the cold of winter, but rather intensifies it, how can it be that it heats by borrowed light from the Sun? For example: When the luminaries conjoin in Capricorn, the Moon, departing from the conjunction, is continuously more illuminated by the Sun and approaches closer to our zenith, until, having completed almost a semicircle, that is, 185 parts, it is fully ignited, and traversing Cancer, it becomes closest to our dwellings. There, we observe that the Moon, absorbing the Sun's light in this manner and approaching closer and closer to our zenith, not only does not warm our air but even cools it more. Therefore, it can be doubted whether it heats by light drawn from the Sun. To this hesitation, we must respond that the presence of the illuminated Moon brings us cold not by itself, but by another circumstance. For it very often happens that people consider that to be the cause of some effect which is by no means the cause. For the waxing Moon raises many vapors from the earth, which, being very cold, it is not surprising if they make the air colder, especially since the Moon's heat always remains weaker than to be able to consume the abundance of vapors. For the same reason, the Sun, receding from the Tropic of Capricorn, cools more and makes winter more severe. Afterwards, however, advancing from Capricorn, having become higher, it projects straighter and therefore stronger rays towards us, which gradually consume more and more of the exhaled vapors, and thus produce heat. Let these things be said about the primary qualities of the stars. Next, let us show what naturally follows from these qualities. And first, the krasis or mixture of the stars causes some stars to be called benefics, and some malefics, or as they are called today, fortunates and infortunates. For those that are excessively cold, like Saturn, and those that are excessively hot, like Mars, are called intemperate, malefic, and unfortunate. But astrologers call Saturn the greater infortune because of its very bad temperament, and Mars the lesser infortune because of its lesser dyscrasia. Those stars, however, in whose krasis heat dominates humidity, are called benefics and favorable to human nature. But just as there are degrees of krasis, so there are degrees of benefics. For those in which heat perfectly dominates humidity, as in Jupiter, are most benefic because of their excellent mixture; those in which heat moderately contains humidity, as in Venus, are moderately temperate and benefic; finally, those in which overflowing humidity is minimally restrained due to the scarcity of heat, as in the Moon, are judged to be little temperate and benefic. From these, it can be clearly seen: First, why Jupiter is called the greater fortune, and Venus the lesser fortune. Secondly, that the Moon, shining with a full orb, if it then acquires enough heat in proportion to its humidity, brings the greatest felicities; but when empty and weakly heating, it portends calamities and miseries. Moreover, if Saturn is conjoined with Mars, it acquires excessive cold; if with the Sun or Mars, excessive dryness. When thus affected, it is to be judged intemperate and malefic. But the same Saturn, when conjoined with Jupiter and Venus or the Moon, becomes hot and humid. Therefore, it is then to be considered temperate and benefic. The Sun, leader, prince, and moderator of the other luminaries, the mind of the world and its temperance, although it is the greatest fortune of all that are seen in the sky because of its immense benefits and excellent temperament, is nevertheless numbered among the stars of ambiguous nature, and therefore sometimes among the malefics and infortunates. These names, indeed, never truly apply to it from a true cause, but there are four principal reasons why it is sometimes so named, as Cardan relates. First, because it obscures and impedes the other stars with its light. Pliny, Book 2, Chapter 18, says: "The Sun and conjunctions of the extreme orbit into dark obscurity." From these words, we gather three ways in which stars are obscured. First, the Sun, which is seen alone wherever it may be in the world, from which it also received its name; and of this mode, we speak here. Secondly, the points of the Ecliptic, or nodes, in which the luminaries fail. Lastly, the extreme additions of the circles, which, although they do not entirely obscure the stars, nevertheless render them more obscure due to the great distance. The second reason is that, when conjoined with malefics, it fosters their powers, as will be said below concerning the Anaretic places. The third is that, when joined with fixed stars, it sometimes tends to change its nature in some way. For example, who is unaware that the Sun's vapors are ignited at the rising of the Dog Star? The effects of which star are felt most amply on earth. The seas boil at its rising, wines ferment in cellars, things move.

[Planetary Appearances and Conjunctions]
The difference is that the Sun, revolving from the Sun to the very bottom, can be separated by a space of unknown things, and in that interval of time, when the epicycle once permeates, they are twice conjoined with the Sun, first by direct motion in the highest apogee of the epicycle, then by retrograde motion in the lowest apogee, all these four forms receive their risings and settings. First, hence, as the Moon shines forth in its evening rising, when it has proceeded a little from the conjunction of the Sun and from the highest apogee of the epicycle, and moves towards its evening station, from which afterwards, when it is about to seek another conjunction at the lowest apogee of the epicycle, it is hidden by the Sun's rays not long before the perigee of the epicycle, in its evening setting. Therefore, in the eastern semicircle of the epicycle, where they descend from its apogee to its perigee, they are called Hesperian and following, contrary to the three superior planets. Then, ascending from this place to the morning station, and not far from the perigee of the epicycle, they rise in the morning rising, having left the Sun's rays: finally, having passed the morning station, when they are again going to the highest apogee and seeking the Sun's conjunction again, they are a little distant from the apogee of the epicycle, they are hidden in the morning setting, and afterwards they proceed to the same turns. Therefore, in the meantime, while they appear through the western semicircle in the morning before the Sun's rising, they are called preceding, like the three superior planets. In an exemplary discussion, we will make the otherwise obscure matter much easier. Let the epicycle be AC EG: The highest apogee or its longest distance from the center of the world is A, where the middle of progression or direct motion is, and the first conjunction of the Sun and Venus: Evening rising. B, from where Venus descends in the epicycle, and diminishes its progression. The first or evening station C, from which it begins to retrograde. The evening setting occurs at point D. The middle of regression and the lowest point of the small circle of the apogee shows point E, under the 15th part of Taurus, where the star is again with the Sun. The morning rising is F. And the morning or second station occurs at G, from where it begins to progress. Point H is the morning setting, from which it proceeds most rapidly to the Sun and to repeat the said turns. The center of the world is T. The body is placed on the epicycle, and the quadrant of the zodiac rests on it, under which circle the center of the epicycle K, together with the line of the Sun's mean motion, revolves from west to Aries, the star running through the ambit of the epicycle. Two lines from the center of the world T through points G and G, erected to the zodiac, touching both epicycles, indicate the stations, as has been said. While the star descends from point B to point D, it is called Hesperus: while it ascends from sign F to sign H, it is called Lucifer. In the remaining spaces around the apogees, having lost both surnames, the name Venus is simply used. In the Ephemerides, the syllables Or. or Occ. are written under the notes of the five planets in the right column of the Ephemerides, showing when the planet is oriental or occidental. What position the planet has in the epicycle cannot be better judged than from the corrected anomaly of commutation, which in the five wandering stars is always counted from the top of the epicycle towards the east or through the consequent signs. For if it is nothing, it will indicate the planet culminating in the middle of its progression: if it has completed the semicircle exactly, it will indicate it pushed down to the bottom of the epicycle. Finally, it will show that it is lingering in the eastern semicircle of the epicycle: if greater, in the western. The knowledge of this matter contributes greatly to knowing whether the planet is free from the Sun's rays, or whether it is oppressed by them, as we taught a little while ago. The planet appearing before sunrise, oriental dexter, is called so not by reason of its region, but because it exists on the right side of the Sun. Similarly, in the evening, setting after sunset, it is called occidental sinister with respect to the Sun, because it sets after the Sun, and is found on the left side of the world from the Sun. Here you must observe which parts of the world are right, and which are left: concerning which distinction there are three opinions of authors. The first is that of the author and astronomers, who call the eastern part of the world left, and the western right. Pliny, book 2, chapter 8, concerning the world running to the west, says: "But the paths of all wandering stars, and that they move contrary to the world, that is, to the left, while it always rushes to the right." For astronomers, contemplating the sky, turn their faces to the south, where the course of the stars is most evident; for the motion of the stars near the poles is scarcely felt. Contrary to this is the opinion of geographers, who call the east right, and the west left. These, looking at the sky, turn their feet towards the pole, whose altitude they scrutinize. The last is that of the poets, who call the entire hemisphere from the equinox to the north right, and the other left. In the second of the Metamorphoses, Sol instructs Phaeton with these verses: "Let not the right turn to the twisted serpent: Nor let the left lead to the pressed altar." Thus Lucan writes that the southern shadows of those who came from Arabia to Pompey's aid were changed into northern ones: "Arabs, you come into an unknown world, marveling that the shadows of the trees do not go to the left." For before they had left the torrid zone, the shadows followed them, but after leaving it, they preceded them. What he says, that the two inferior planets, when they are occidental, assume three superior ones, and thus become stronger, seems to contradict Ptolemy, who taught that the five oriental planets are universally stronger. Even if this is true, nevertheless it is consistent that the inferior planets also sometimes rejoice in their setting. For since they have a mean motion common with the Sun, it can happen that they are faster than the Sun and by their nature become occidental: for this reason, the occidental Moon universally rejoices, but the three superior planets are always weakened by their setting due to the slowness of their motion. CONCERNING WHAT HAPPENS TO PLANETS TOWARDS EACH OTHER. Their being towards each other, that is, the same as conjunction, that is, when two planets are in two signs aspecting each other, and the lighter one is in its sign with fewer degrees than the heavier one is in its sign: if there are six degrees or less between them, then it is said that the lighter one goes to the conjunction of the heavier one: and when their degrees are equal, their conjunction is perfected: when it has passed it, it will be separated from it: this conjunction is called a conjunction of longitude. A conjunction of latitude, however, is when two planets are joined by latitude. And if there is an application of conjunction, their latitude must be equal in one part: and if there is a conjunction from opposition, their latitudes must be equal, so that the latitude of one is ascending in the north, and that of the other descending in the north: or one ascending in the south, and the other descending in the south: or if there is an application from any of the other aspects, that is, that the latitude of one is northern ascending, and that of the other southern descending: and vice versa in the south: and this is the application of latitude that has been mentioned. 2. And when one planet separates from another and is not joined to any other planet, as long as it is in the same sign, it is said to be void of course. 3. And when a planet is in a sign, and no other planet aspects this sign, as long as the other planet is in the same sign; it is called feral or wild. 4. And when a lighter planet separates from a heavier planet, and is joined to another, it transfers the nature of the first to the second. 5. A planet also transfers nature in another way, that is, when a lighter planet is joined to a heavier planet, and that heavier planet is again joined to another heavier planet, then the middle one transfers.

[Planetary Debilities and Afflictions]
346. Or they may be in opposition to their dignities or powers, or descending in the south or meridian; or falling from angles, or from succeeding angles, or in houses, or in cadent houses. Or they may be in the via combusta, which is the middle of the 15th degree of Libra and the first half of Scorpio, or they may be joined to a retrograde, impeded, or cadent planet, even if received. Or they may be the three superior planets occidental to the Sun, or in feminine quarters. And the debility of the Sun is when it is in feminine signs, or in feminine quarters, unless it is in the ninth house. And the debility of the three inferior planets is when they are oriental, or in masculine quarters. I. This describes a catalog of places in which planets increase or decrease their strength, are fortunate or unfortunate. And what it means can be clearly understood from the text. This astrological phrase (that they are cadent from them) should be noted here. A planet with any star, if it occupies the same sign, or is distant from it by 4, 7, or 10 signs (in the order of the signs), is said to be in an angle from it. But if it has traversed the second, fifth, eighth, or eleventh sign in order from it, it is in a succedent house; if it occupies the 3rd, 6th, 9th, or 12th, it is said to be cadent from it. Likewise, in this place, a superior planet is said to be more eminent, from which it is distant by 10 or 11 signs according to the order of the signs; as in my example, it is exalted above and traversing the sign. For my example is the tenth sign from Sagittarius. In this way, the MC angle is exalted above the ascendant. We will see the remaining forms of exaltations, or as they are called, elevations, below at the end of the following difference. This is the 2. Obsession is when two stars or two rays in some way enclose one star, with no other ray intervening, as if it is in the 10th part, 4th in the 11th, in the 12th. Jupiter is afflicted by being obsessed by two infortunes. Likewise, if Saturn is in the 6th part of Cancer, in the 8th part of the same Cancer, in the 10th part. The Moon will be said to be surrounded by the body of Saturn and the square ray of Mars. Likewise, if it is in such a figure: the Moon in, and in, which transmits its trine radiation into Leo, and its diameter into Libra, surrounds the Moon with its evil rays. In the same way, signs are also said to be obsessed, when, namely, one malefic is found at the beginning and another at the end. But when the Sun or a benefic aspects a planet or sign that is obsessed with a sextile or trine aspect, so that the aspect is within the orbs, then through such an aspect the obsession is resolved. Therefore, when malefics have obsessed the Moon or the horoscope, with no benefic shining upon the obsessed, they say that the native will have a short life. That it says nocturnal planets are stronger below the earth during the day than above the earth, we showed above in the first difference that this is contrary to Ptolemy's opinion. 3. As for the via combusta or Milky Way, Cardan in our century determines it to be in the northern part from the 19th degree of Gemini to the 30th degree of the same. And in the southern half from the 5th degree of Sagittarius to the 15th degree of the same. And again, because it is divided there from the 23rd degree of Sagittarius to the 4th degree. Of the great stars outside the zodiac, 4 are found in the vicinity of the Milky Way, namely the right side of Perseus, Capella in Auriga, Vega, the tail of Cygnus, and that which is in the 2nd degree, 18th minute, 12th second of Sagittarius with a southern latitude of 4 degrees, of the second magnitude, called Antares or the heart of Scorpio, which is important to observe. For every star in the Milky Way, or in its vicinity, somewhat disturbs the intellect and causes many other things. And so much for the text. Hyspalensis, whose opinion many follow, in examining the strengths of planets, observes only the principal places of this catalog. First, he considers whether the planet is combust or not: Second, whether it is direct, swift, or slow: Third, whether it is placed in its splendors, such as domicile, exaltation, trigon, term, or decan: Fourth, whether it is in any aspect of benefics, or in a good aspect of benefics: Fifth and finally, how it is placed in the figure of the heavens, whether it is in an angular, succedent, or cadent house. Therefore, planets free from solar rays, direct, swift, placed in their splendors, associated with good aspects and benefics, found in angles or succedent houses, are to be judged fortunate and powerful.

[Aphetic Places and Anareta]
The fourth section. 383. P. However, they are suitable by reason of the tenth house. And the five degrees of the ultimate tenth, although they are powerless and useless with respect to the same, are nevertheless judged suitable by reason of the following eleventh house. Therefore, we must consider the 9th and 10th houses without subtracting the five parts following their end, and subtract them only from the first, seventh, and eleventh, whose subsequent houses, namely the second, eighth, and twelfth, are not Aphetic. These are Ptolemy's Aphetic places. On Apheta: The Chaldeans call the significator and ruler of life to be moderated 'leech', but Ptolemy calls it 'kyrion zoes kai apheten', that is, the 'dimissor', from 'aphetes', because it possesses, as it were, a task from which the threads, once drawn and released, measure the fatal span of human life. Indeed, I believe that the poets' image of the three Fates, which Varro thinks are derived from 'partus' (birth) by a change of one letter, pertains here: for they are thought to bestow good or evil upon men at birth, and to moderate their lives as if spinning them. Lachesis, the spinner, provides the task, from which Clotho draws and twists the threads, which Atropos finally breaks. Therefore, I thought Lachesis signifies the Apheta, Clotho the procession of the Apheta, and Atropos the anaretic place. But as to whom this rulership and dispensation of life should be attributed, the Arabs differ much less from Ptolemy than in the constitution of the Aphetic places. The Arabs transfer the moderation of life to one of these six, namely, to the Sun or Moon, or to the degree of conjunction or prevention, or finally to the Part of Fortune or the Ascendant. But Ptolemy orders five, namely, the Ascendant, the Part of Fortune, and the ruler of these places, which of them it is convenient to choose as the rulers of life according to his opinion, the following descriptions will show clearly enough. In diurnal nativities, look at the Sun, if it is in any of the five said Aphetic places, let it be the Apheta above others. But if the Sun seems unsuitable for prolonging life due to the unsuitability of the place, then consequently, look at the Moon. And if the Moon cannot be attributed this rulership, then... 384. 3. Take the ruler, who has three of the dignities in the three places, namely: 1. The preceding conjunction, which is in the three places. DIFFERENCE: For if such a planetary ruler is in the Aphetic places, it will be given to the luminaries. But if this ruler is found in the Aphetic places, namely in the 3rd place of the Ascendant, then the Aphesis, or as they call it, the 'legium', devolves to the Ascendant. Observe that in diurnal nativities, attention must be paid to the place of the preceding conjunction, even if it immediately preceded and was closer to the nativity. For the Sun is more powerful than the others. In nocturnal nativities: 1. Make the Moon the Apheta, if it is in the Aphetic places. 2. Take the Sun, if it is in those 25 degrees that follow the center of the Ascendant. And if neither luminary can prolong life, then further: 3. Take the ruler, who has three of the five dignities in the three places, namely: 1. The place of the Ascendant. For if such a planet is in the 2nd Aphetic place, it will moderate life; if not, then in the 3rd place. 4. If the conjunction immediately preceded the nativity, take the Ascendant, because it favors the Ascendant. But if the opposition immediately preceded, take the Part of Fortune if it is in an Aphetic place; if not, then the rulership must again be deferred to the Ascendant. It should be noted that in nocturnal nativities, the opposition must be attended to, even when the conjunction was closer to the nativity, because it is sufficient, and has no power. Moreover, the place, as we have warned above, is the place of the luminary which is found above the earth at the time of the opposition. For by its 385. presence, it does not suffer its privilege to be taken away, which is that in a diurnal opposition, its place is preferred to the place of the Sun, unless it is found exactly in the west. Finally, let it be repeated here that by 5 dignities, Ptolemy understands houses, trigon, exaltation, bounds, conjunction or any other aspect, indeed even intuition and rulership, provided they agree exactly, otherwise not. Caution: If both luminaries and the ruler of their own condition (who is he who in diurnal nativities rules in the places of the Sun, the preceding conjunction, and the Ascendant, but in nocturnal nativities rules in the Moon, the preceding conjunction, and the Ascendant) are in Aphetic places, that of the luminaries is to be preferred which is of greater virtue and in a more suitable place. As in nocturnal nativities, if the Moon is in the ninth or seventh, but the Sun in the Ascendant: then the Sun is to be preferred to the Moon, and especially if it is near the degree of the Ascendant or in its dignity, but nevertheless within 25 degrees below the horizon. In diurnal nativities, if the Sun is in the tenth, and the Moon in the ninth, then the Moon will be preferred to the Sun. But if the Sun is in the tenth and the Moon in the eleventh, they will be almost equal by reason of their places: therefore, you will judge that to be preferred which is endowed with a greater prerogative. But if they still do not seem to differ notably enough, consider whether the lord of the place applies to any of them by body or by a benevolent aspect. For if the powerful lord of the Apheta's place sees the same Apheta, and especially with a good aspect, he will make the prolonger much stronger. And this is certainly the reason why the Arabs never attribute the right of moderating life to any single planet, unless another also accedes, whom they call Alcocodes, that is, one who, holding some dignity in the place of the future Apheta, moreover regards the same Apheta. However, the ruler is then finally to be preferred to both luminaries when he has two conditions. The first is that he himself is in a better Aphetic place than the luminaries. The second is that he collects three of the five prerogatives in three places, namely in the place of the Sun, the preceding conjunction, and the Ascendant: And another three in other three places, namely the place of the Moon, the preceding conjunction, and the Ascendant, and then he is called the ruler of both times. This is the law of the prolongers: it remains for us to enumerate the Anaretas in a similar order. On Anaretas: 386. DIFFERENCE. Anaretas, or 'moirai anairetikai', that is, destroying parts, are the bodies and hostile rays of malefics, which, encountering the giver of life in the progressions, cut off the life of the native, or at least portend great dangers to it. For the word 'anaireo' means the same as 'to kill', and 'anairetis' means the same as 'killer' or 'life-cutter'. Hence, they are also commonly, not so ineptly as is thought, called 'abscissor' from 'abscinding life'. However, among Ptolemy's destroying parts, I find two primary kinds: One is that which is of moderation towards the preceding signs, and has only one destroying part, namely the cusp of the western terminator, because it hides the lord of life. But the parts of the stars, either encountering or testifying, at least subtract or add something to those years which were collected by the moderator of life up to the setting, and do not destroy, because they do not impinge on an Aphetic place, but on the contrary, the Apheta is carried to the Anareta. And how much they add or subtract, a matter otherwise somewhat obscure, we will explain below with some example. The other kind of Anaretas is of that direction which is perfected towards the consequent signs, and has 16 principal Anaretas, of which the first six kill by themselves, and are the two bodies of the malefics, and their two opposite aspects, and another two squares. Of the remaining ten Anaretas, who generally do not kill by themselves, but with some condition, the first and most powerful is the square of the Apheta itself proceeding according to the succession of the signs. But the condition or rather the cause why this square kills is that these places, which were initially repugnant, have a contrary nature. From this it is clear that the malefic, encountering the Apheta striking with a square from the beginning, kills more certainly by itself than by a square. The Arabs have taught that neither the bodies of the luminaries nor of the malefics, nor any of their rays, kill when they have taken over the dominion of life. Then follow another four Anaretas, and from the signs hearing or aspecting according to equivalence: As if at the time of birth the Apheta is in the second part of Gemini, but the Anareta is in the 29th part of Cancer: This condition, namely that from the beginning the Anareta is in aspect with the Aphetic place, is necessary here, but not 389. power in the aspects, which we said above kill by themselves: as if the Apheta is transiting Aries, but Saturn the Anareta is in Virgo casting its rays.

[Annual Profection Table and Calculation]
By means of this table, the less experienced will be able to easily determine to which sign any annual profection applies in any given year of age. For example, in our case, in the 41st year of age, which falls in the current year of Christ 1567, the annual profection of the Ascendant will reach 26 degrees 44 minutes of Aquarius, the Moon to 27 degrees 52 minutes of Gemini, the Sun to 8 degrees 54 minutes, the Midheaven to 1 degree 39 minutes, the Part of Fortune to 15 degrees 42 minutes of Scorpio, etc. Next, concerning the finding of the annual progression of aphetic places in days: If, he says, the year of profection reaches the degree of any sign and place, for example, to 17 degrees of Taurus, and if between it and a similar degree of the succeeding sign, that is, 17 degrees of Virgo, which ends the same year, and to which the same progression of the following year will devolve the body or rays of any planet, and it is desired to know the day on which the profection will reach the said planet or its rays; then multiply the degrees and minutes that fall between the degree to which the annual profection arrives and the planet or its rays by 12, that is, you will give to each degree 12 days and 4 hours, and the days will result, which are from the beginning of that year, until the time when the profection will apply to the planet or its rays. For example, in the same example, let the square rays of Saturn be in 5 degrees of Taurus, the arc intercepted between the first part of the sought profection, that is, 17 degrees, and the square rays of Saturn is 18 degrees, which multiplied by 12 produce 219 days of the revolution, at the end of which the progression will enter the rays of Saturn. Furthermore, you will thus calculate the distance or arc from the beginning of the annual profection to the beginning of the succeeding place, about which the question is, in degrees and minutes, if they are present. Take the aspect or other place, about whose application to the annual profection it is asked, and from it subtract the beginning of the annual profection, and the difference between the beginning of the annual profection and the proposed place will remain. For example, the epoch of the profection of the Ascendant in the assumed nativity in the year of Christ 1567, and the 41st year of the native's age, will reach, as we said a little earlier, 26 degrees 44 minutes of Aquarius. It is now asked on what day of the same year this progression will apprehend the square ray of Mars, which falls in 28 degrees 21 minutes of the same Aquarius. First, subtract the beginning of the annual profection from the place of Mars' square, and the middle distance will remain: 1 degree 37 minutes. Mars' square: 3 signs, 28 degrees, 21 minutes. Beginning of annual profection: 3 signs, 26 degrees, 44 minutes. Distance between the beginning of profection and Mars: 0 signs, 1 degree, 37 minutes. Now multiply 12 by the distance of 1 degree 37 minutes, and 19 days will result, at the end of which the profection of the Ascendant in this revolution will pass the square of Mars. Another example: It is desired to know on what day of the said year the profection will reach the square ray of the Sun, which falls in 8 degrees 54 minutes of Pisces. Subtracting the beginning of the annual profection from the Sun's square, 12 degrees 10 minutes remain, which multiplied by 12 produce 148 days, at the end of which the profection of the Ascendant in the said year of age will reach the Sun's square. But the less experienced will be able to calculate the time of annual progressions in days more easily with the help of the appended table. For having known the degrees and minutes by which the beginning of the profection and the succeeding place differ, enter the table with the whole degrees, for opposite it will present itself the time of the sought progression in days, hours, and minutes, to which for any first five minutes, if you add one day, you will have the true time of the profection. As in the previous example, 12 degrees correspond to 146 days, 2 hours, 19 minutes, to which if you add 2 days for 10 minutes, you will have the true time of 148 days, 2 hours, 19 minutes. Now, in order that you may know the month and day of the year into which the found application falls, having found the days of profection, add the days that are counted from the beginning of the year of Christ to the point of nativity or rather of revolution, which is nothing other than the Sun's return to its place in the nativity, for the number of days that arises from this will easily show in the usual table of months, which I have arranged for you here and above in the treatise on the horoscopic apheta, into which day of the month the found application of profection falls. In our example, from the beginning of the year of Christ to the root of the nativity, 141 days, 3 hours, 47 minutes have elapsed. If you wish to know this number more exactly, then by reason of the revolution of the 41st year, you must subtract 21 hours, 12 minutes from the aforesaid time, which done, the exact time of the revolution will remain, namely 140 days, 6 hours, 35 minutes, which time, joining to the found time of profection, that is, 148 days, we will produce 288 days, 6 hours, 35 minutes, from which number of days the next smaller number, namely 274, which is placed opposite September in the table of the bissextile year, being subtracted, leaves 14 complete days, 6 hours, 35 minutes of October, at the end of which the Ascendant will revolve to the square of the Sun. Observe that if by the addition of two times more days arise than a solar year contains, then if the current year was common, 365 days, if bissextile, 366 days, are to be rejected, and what remains is to be referred to the immediately succeeding year of Christ. Furthermore, Ptolemy, near the end of the Quadripartite Construction, teaches that the significators of any nativity progress not only by years, but also by months and days. And the method of annual profections has now been clearly explained. In the monthly profection, however, to each of the profectional months, which are 13 in number, one sign is given, and its lord is the ruler, as we said, so that the sign of any annual profection is the sign of the first profectional month of the same year. One year, therefore, is to be divided into 13 parts, each of which is called a profectional month. In this way, it will happen that in the succeeding revolution, both in the year and in the month, we arrive at the next sign by profection. As in the example above, in the 41st year, the annual profection of the Ascendant reached 26 degrees 44 minutes of Aquarius, which is the same.

[Profectional Months and Days]
The sign of the first profectional month of the same year is ♈; of the second, ♉; of the third, ♊; of the fourth, ♋; of the fifth, ♌; of the sixth, ♍; of the seventh, ♎; of the eighth, ♏; of the ninth, ♐; of the tenth, ♑; of the eleventh, ♒; of the twelfth, ♓; of the thirteenth, ♈; of the fourteenth, ♉, which profectional month is also the beginning of the following year. From this it is clear that the monthly profection has carried the annual rulership from one sign to another through one sign. Since the year is divided into 13 months, it follows that one profectional month contains 28 days, 2 hours, 17 scruples, 14, 37, 24. But Ptolemy omits hours and scruples, both because they could cause little error and because they were easily incorporated into constructed tables. Similarly, for diurnal profection, one profectional month must be divided into 13 equal parts, each of which will have approximately 2 days, 3 hours, and 52 scruples, 14. Moreover, to know how far the profection, both monthly and daily, extends to any given time in the year, calculate the time elapsed from the beginning of the annual revolution of the current year up to the proposed or assumed time, in this manner: First, count the days and the remaining parts of the time, if present, comprised between the beginning of the current usual month and the epoch of the nativity, or, which is the same, the point of revolution, and add this time to the number of days found opposite the immediately preceding usual month, placed in the first series if it was a common year, in the second if it was a bissextile year. The time that arises from this (which is that comprised between the beginning of the Roman or Christian year and the epoch of the Sun in the nativity) keep for the entire Solar year. Then, in the same way we said, learn how much time has elapsed from the beginning of the Roman year up to the proposed time: Finally, subtract the former from the latter, and the time elapsed from the root of the revolution up to the proposed time will remain. This measured time, now found, is to be sought in the table of profectional months, just as is usually done when the time corresponding to the mean motion of any planet is sought. And if you find the time precisely in the area of the table, the number on the left will show you the number of profectional months elapsed from the beginning of the current Solar year. If, however, you do not find your time precisely in the area of the table, take the exact next smaller time, and subtract it from the time you could not put into the table, so that the superfluous days with scruples remain. You will assign one sign to each profectional month, starting from the sign of the annual profection. The superfluous days with the adhering scruples, put into the table of monthly profection, and opposite them will appear the degrees and scruples to be added to the signs and degrees previously noted, and thus you will be led to the place of the zodiac where the profection arrives at the end of the elapsed time. If, in the manner described above, with the superfluous days, you enter the table of diurnal profection, you will extract the number of signs and degrees to be computed from the sign of the monthly profection: knowing these, you will have found the places of all profections. We will make the matter clearer with an exemplary discussion. In the assumed example and in the return of the 41st year, it was shown that the annual profection of the horoscope reached 26 degrees, 44 scruples, 13 of Aquarius, and that on May 20th completed, at 6 hours, 35 scruples, 14. For, from the time of the root, by reason of the present revolution, 21 hours, 12 scruples, 14 had to be removed, as we said a little earlier. Let us now, for example, investigate the places of the profections for the 9th day of July of the same current year. First, the time that elapsed from the beginning of the Roman year to the point of revolution is found to be 141 days, 6 hours, 35 scruples, 14, for the present year is a bissextile year. Then, similarly, the same time that extends from the same beginning to the proposed time is 191 days, from which if the former time is subtracted, namely 141 days, 6 hours, 35 scruples, 14, there will remain 49 days, 17 hours, 25 scruples, 14, which is the time measured from the root of the revolution to the limit of the proposed time. If you put this number of days and scruples of time into the area of the table already described by us, you will find that it corresponds to approximately 5 parts, which you join with 26 degrees, 44 scruples, 14 of Aquarius, making 1 degree, 44 scruples, 14 of Pisces. Therefore, you will declare that the annual progression of the horoscope has proceeded to 1 degree, 44 scruples, 14 of Pisces at the given time. Moreover, for obtaining the monthly profection, that time, namely 49 days, 17 hours, 25 scruples, 14, must be sought in the area of the following table of profectional months. But since it is not found there, subtract from it the next smaller number found there, namely 28 days, 2 hours, 17 scruples, 14, 37, 24, after which there will remain 21 days, 15 hours, 7 scruples, 14, 23, 24, beyond one profectional month. TABLE OF PROFECTIONAL AND USUAL MONTHS. Profectional Months. Days Hours 14 24. 1 28 2. 17 37 2 56 4 35 14 3 84 6 52 51 4 112 9 10 28 5 140 11 28 5 6 168 13 45 42 7 196 16 3 18 8 224 18 20 55 9 252 20. 38 32 10 280 22 56 9 11 309 1 13 46 12 337 3 31 23 13 365 5 49 0 Usual Months Common Year Bissextile Year Days Days January 31 31 February 59 60 March 90 91 April 120 121 May 151 152 June 181 182 July 212 213 August 243 244 September 273 274 October 304 305 November 334 335 December 365 366 TABLE OF PROFECTION. Monthly. In days. In hours & scruples. Days Sc. P. 14 24 Hours P. 14 14 Min. P. 1 1 1 0 I 44 I .م 240 31 11 22 45 2 2 8..8 2 5.201 32 25 25 3 0 3 12 12 3 080331286 4 0 4 16 16 4ο τ0 41 345 30 46 5 0 520 20 50 13 21 35 133 26 6 0 6 24 24 6 0 16 1 1 361 36 6 7 7 28 28 7 0.18.41 371:38 46 8 8:32 328 Ο 21 21 38 41 26 9.1.0 936 36 9 0241 39 1447 10 • 10.40.40이 10 0 26 42 40 1 46 47 II Ο ΙΙ 44 44 It Ο 29 22 41 2 49 27 2 Ο 12 48 48 12 Ο 32 2 42 2517 13 013 5.2 52 13 034 42 43 254 47 14 Ο 14 56 56 14 037-22442-57 27 τς ο 16 1 1.5 40.31 45120 8. 16 017 54 168 42 43 46 22 48 17 0 18 98 17 Ο 45 23 472528 18 0 19 13 12 18 0483 48 28 8 196.20 17 16 19 0504349 2.10 48 20621 21 20 20 05323 50 213 28 21 Ο 22 25 24 21 0564 SI 2169 21 023 2028 22 05844 52 2 18:49 230 2433 32 23 I I 24 53 2 21 29 24 0.25 37 36 24 144 54 224 9 25 0 25 41 40 25 16 44 55 2 26 49 26 0 27 45 44 26 19-24 56 2 29 29 27 Ο 28 49 48 27 1125 57 232 10 28 0 29 53 52 28 I 14 45 58234:50 29 057 56 29 1.17 25 592-37 30. 30 1 20 5 60 2 40 10 62 TABLE OF PROFECTION. Diurnal. Days Sc. P424 Hours P. 14 24 Min. P. 14 24 1 0:13.52.52 1034 42 31 17 55 48 2 027 454512.11 924 32 18 30 30. 1343837 3447 33112 1253179 4. 2 18.49 34.19 39 54 2.2 2421 2 53 31 35 20 14 36 62 23 17 14 63 18 13 36 20 49 18 7.3.7 10 6 ١٠ 7:4 2.55 37 21 24 I 8 325 258 84 37 37 38 21 58 43 9445851 95 12, 20 3922 23 25 IO 4 18 48 43 105 47 2 40238 7 II 5.2435 6 21-44 43 23 42 42 12 5 16 34 28 12 65626 42 24 17 32 13 6027 20 13731 8 4324 52 14 14 6 14 20 12 148551 44 25 26 56 15 6.28 134 158 40 33 45261 38 16 7 17 557 56 2 15 15 46 26 36 20 177 25 58 49 17 9 495.7 47 27:14 188 951 41 18 10 24 39 48 127.45 45 19 8 23 44 34 19 10 59 21 4928.20 שקל 27 20 9.7 37 2620 11 34 4 50 28.55 9 25 9 21 30 18 21 12 8 46 SE 29:29 51 I 22 1105 23 11 22 12 43 28 52 30 14 33 1 23 10 19 16 3 23 13 18-10 5330-39 15 24 11 3855 24 13 52 52 54 31 13 58 251117147 25 14 27-34 55 31 48 40 26-0054.40 26 14 2.17 56 32 23 22 27: 0 14 47.32 27 15 36.59 57 32 5.8 4 28 0 28 40 24 28 16 11 41 58 133.32 46 29 1 12 33.15 29.16 46.23 59 34 7 29 30 30 117 21 5 60 34 42 1 4 What

[Planetary Rule and Aphetic Places]
FOURTH 433. The rule of the Moon is transferred from Saturn to Jupiter and the Moon immediately following, which dominates up to the end of Libra, and 121st part of the 1st scruple of Scorpio, with Mars participating in the bounds in both places. For Mars holds the dominion of the bounds in the first six parts of Scorpio, both according to Ptolemy and the Egyptians. From here, a little after the first part of Scorpio, the rule of the rays is transferred from the Moon to Mercury, who projects his trine radiation into the 121st part of the 1st scruple of Scorpio, and by reason of these rays extends his rule up to the 28th part of Scorpio, with Mars participating first on account of the dominion of the bounds, then Jupiter, then Venus, and finally Mercury. From here, in the 28th part, 211th scruple of Scorpio, Mars assumes the most powerful rule of all: For besides the fact that he corporeally occupies the said place in his own house and trine, and being an enemy of the ascendant, he retrogrades in a fixed and venomous sign, with the testimony of the same Mars and Saturn, lords of the bounds of that direction, reaching the beginning of the 41st year, whose annual changes of signs and stellar progressions will be as follows: Annual Progressions. part.scr.1. Horosc. 26 44 ... 27 52 Lot 15 42 M.C. 1 39 Π Stellar progressions. part.scr.r. 8 54 20 3 08 54 Ⅱ 1158 44 46 retro. 22 20 2 550 21 44 13 18 m Another example: Let the horoscoping part be the sixth of Taurus, where there is no planet nor any ray (for if any planet or ray were in the horoscoping part, it would be the first arbiter of times), but nevertheless in the preceding place, that is, in the 4th part of Taurus, is the body of Jupiter, and in the following 12th part is the trine of the Moon, which is immediately followed by the body of Mars in the 12th part of Gemini, because DIFFERENCE 434 Jupiter will first govern life from the sixth part of Taurus, up to the 12th part of the same, where the trine rays of the Moon are: and the lord of the bounds will be its participant, but also powerful herself, for in the same place she has a trine and a house. We assign the first year to the sixth part, and not the fourth of Taurus, which Jupiter occupied near the ascendant, because, as has been said, the direction and the governance of the direction must begin from the place of the Apheta, and not from the place of the governor. Furthermore, from the 12th part of Taurus, up to the end of Taurus, indeed up to the 12th part of Gemini, since there are no other rays or planets in between, the Moon will govern with the lords of the bounds, but in many ways and not in one way. For from the 12th part up to the 24th part of the same, she will be more powerful than the lords of the bounds, because such is the magnitude of the Moon's light, which, the fuller it is, the greater its efficacy is to be judged. But from the 24th part to the end of Taurus, since the Moon has altitude in 8, her forces will be almost equal to the lord of the end of that part. Finally, from the beginning of Gemini to its twelfth part, on account of the distance of the trine rays, and the change of sign, where the Moon has no power, the lord of the end will have greater power than the Moon. In this way, therefore, we will create general arbiters of times. Signifiers. 7. The Aphetic places, or as they are called, illegal places, that is, places which progress, are five, from whose progression we gather what will happen to the native in his entire life. We consider the progression of the Ascendant as the Apheta, to perceive the native's health, what will happen to the body, and at what time useful or useless journeys will be undertaken. Therefore, when benefics or their good rays are led to the ascendant, we will decree good bodily habit and fortunate journeys for the native. But if malefics or their harmful rays occur to the same horoscope, we will predict bodily dyscrasia and unfortunate journeys for the native. Regarding the progressions of the other Aphetic places, we will pronounce in the same way concerning those things which signify fortune or misfortune. These places which are enumerated here, since they are the subjects of all goods, it follows that it is not necessary to proceed with any others besides these five in nativities. For all goods are referred either to the mind, or to the body, or to FOURTH. 435 or to fortune. Goods of the mind are decreed. Goods of the body depend on the ascendant. As for the goods of fortune, those which are more principal, such as dignities, are from: The mediocre ones, however, are taken from the horoscope and the M.C. The same number of places are also enumerated by Ptolemy and Hermes, enunciated 77. Ptolemy says: "The progression of the ascendant for those things which pertain to the body, the part of fortune for those things which are external, the Moon for the connection of the body and soul, the midheaven for actions." 1 2 Table of right ascensions G.G. m. G. m.G. m. G. m.G. m. G. m. 00 027 5457 48 90 0122 12 152 6 10 5528 5158 51 91 6123 14153 3 1029. 49/1954 92.12 124 16154 0 4530 4660-17 93 17 125 18 154 57 32 434034462. 09422 126 20/155 54 54 3532 4263 3 95 27 127 22 156 51 65 3033 4064 696 33 128.24 157 48 76 25/343965 997 38 129 25 158 45 87 2035 3766 13 98 43 130 26 159 41 98 15/36 3667 17 99 48 131 27 160 37 109 1137 3568 21 100 53 132 27 161 33 1110 638 3469 25 101 58 133 28 162 29 1211 139 33 70 29 103 3 134 29 163 25 13/11 5740 32 78 33 104 8 135 29 164 21 14/12 52 48 3172 38 105 13 136 29 165 17 15/13 48 42 3173 43 106 17 137 29 166 12 1614 4343 3174 47 107 22 138 29 167 8 1715 3944 3175 52 108 27 139 28 168 3 18 16 35 45 3176 57 109 31 140 27 168 59 1957 3146 32.78 2110 35 141 26169 54 2018 2747 33 79 7 111 39 142 25 170 49 21/19 2348 3380 12 112 43 143 24578 45 22 20 1949 3481 17 113 47 144 23 172 40 2321 1550 3582 22114 51145 24173 35 24/22 1253 3683 27 115 54 146 20 174 30 2523 952 3884 39 116 57 147 18175 25 2624 653 4085 38 118 0148 16 176 20 2725 354 4286 43 119 3 149 14 177 15 2816 055 4487 48 120 6 150 11178 10 2926 5756 4688 54121 9151 9179 5 30.27 5457 48.90 1122 12152 6180 : The remainder of the table of right ascensions. 437 G. G. m. G. m.G. m. G. m.G. m. G. m. 0180 0207 54 237 48 270 0302 12332 6 1180 55208 51 238 51 271 6303 14 333 3 2181 50209 49 239 54 272 12 304 16334 3182 45 210 46 240 57273 17305 18 334 57 4183 40111 44242 0274 22 306 20335 54 5184 35 212 42 243 3275 27 307 22 326 51 6185 30213 40244 6276 33308 24337 48 7186 25214 39 245 9277 38309 25 338 45 8187 20215 37 246 13 278 43 310 26339 41 9188 15216 36 247 17 179 48 311 27 340 37 10 189 11217 35 248 21 280 53 312 27 341 33 11 190 6218 34349 25281 58 313 28 342 29 12191 1219 33250 29283 3314 29343 25 13 191 57 220 32258 33284 8315 29344 21 14 192 52 221 31252 38 285 13 316 29345 17 15193 48 222 31 253 43 286 17 317 29 346 12 16194 43 223 31 254 47 287 22 318 29 347 8 17 195 39 224 31255 52 288 27 319 28 348 3 18196 35 225 31256 57 289 31320 27348 59 19197 31226 32258 2290 35321 26349 54. 20198 27 227 33259 7291 39 322 25350 50 21199 23 228 33 260 12 292 43 323 24351 45 22 200 19 229 34 261 17 293 45324 23352 40 23 201 15 230 35 262 22 294 51325 21353 35 24 202 12231 36 263 27295 34326 20354 30 25:03 9232 38 264 33 296 57 327 18 355 25 262046233 40265 3.8 298 0328 16 356 20 27205 3234 42 266 43 299 3329 14357 15 28 206 0235 44267 48 300 6330 11358 10 29 206 57236 46 268 54301 9331 9359 5 30/207 54237 48/270 0302. 12/332 6 360 0

[Lord of the Hour and Annual Predictions]
The lord of the hour signifies the health or illness of the native's body, just as the lord of the ascendant of the radix (nativity) signifies it. You will assign the lord of the second hour from it to the second house from the ascendant in the second year, and through it will be signified the substance in the same year, just as it is signified by the lord of the house of substance. And you will assign the lord of the third hour from it to the third house from the ascendant in the third year, and through it will be signified in the same year the brothers, sisters, and other things, just as it is signified by the lord of the third house. You will assign the lord of the fourth hour to the fourth house from the ascendant in the fourth year, and through its position in the same year will be signified the fathers and those who are signified by the fourth house. You will do similarly with the lords of the hours in succession, that is, you will assign the lord of each hour to a house from the radical houses. And the lord of the 12th hour from the hour of nativity will be the 12th house from the radical ascendant, and the 12th year. And the lord of the 13th hour from the nativity of the radical ascendant will be the 13th year. And the lord of the 14th hour from it will be the house of substance for the 14th year. And the lord of the first hour is called the lord of the ascendant of the hour, the lord of the second hour is called the lord of the house of substance, and the lord of the third hour is called the lord of the house of brothers; and so in others similarly, the lord of each of these hours is named by the name of the house, and is also called the lord of the orb, and is signified by it in every year just as it is signified by the Alcochoden, that is, by the lord of the year. And some astrologers place the lord of the orb, namely the radical ascendant, in the first year, and in the second year the planet that succeeds it, and in the third year the planet that succeeds this one, as has been said concerning the lord of the hour. And from this comes the Alfridaria disposition, that is, when the nativity is diurnal, the Sun will preside over its disposition at the beginning of life, according to the quantity of its Alfridaria years, which are ten. After this, the planet that succeeds the Sun, which is Venus, whose Alfridaria years are eight, and after Venus, the planet that succeeds her, which is Mercury, and its years are thirteen. Then the Moon: its Alfridaria years are nine; then Saturn, and its Alfridaria years are eleven; then Jupiter, and its Alfridaria years are twelve; then Mars, and its Alfridaria years are seven; then the head of the dragon, and its Alfridaria years are three; after this the tail, and its Alfridaria years are two. The years collected together are 75 years. After this, the disposition returns to the Sun; and similarly up to the last of the planets. If, however, the nativity is nocturnal, the disposition begins with the Moon, and it will dispose its Alfridaria years, which are nine. Similarly, planet after planet, as we said before, in the Sun. And when a planet has disposed its Alfridaria years, it will specifically dispose the first seventh alone, that is, the seventh part of its Alfridaria; then the planet that succeeds it participates with it in the second seventh; after this, the third planet, which succeeds the second, participates with it in the third seventh; and so until the planet that is before it participates with it in the last seventh of its Alfridaria years; and each has judgment when it participates with another over the nativity. The astrological elements of the author are now almost all explained, as far as they pertain to obtaining the truth. The rest, however, which follows, except for the chapter on the preeminence of the planets, and the lunar horoscope or part of fortunes, seem to dissent from nature, and to be more consonant with fortune-telling and the fortuitous cases of numbers, and other such trifles, than with true and physical reasons, and not undeservedly. For Ptolemy himself touches upon these very things by name in a few places, and then immediately rejects them as idle and empty: "These things, however," he says, "are probable, but not natural, but rather based on popular opinion." And around the beginning of the third book, he gravely criticizes such sophistical and superstitious astrology with these words: "Those things which many have curiously and petulantly sought, and which bear no verisimilitude, we will relegate to those things which are not conveniently said to be of nature; but those things which can be apprehended by nature, not through lots and numbers, to which no reasons of nature are inherent, but by observing the configurations of familiar places." Therefore, since the following things are also of this nature, we will briefly touch upon them. And from this, in inquiring into the dodecatemoria of the planets, one should attend to the measured spaces of the planets in the signs in which they are found, and having noted these by degrees and minutes, multiply the completed journey by 12, and to the number generated by the multiplication, add the whole that the planet has measured in the signs. Then, from the beginning of the sign in which the planet resides, project the sum collected, giving 30 degrees to each sign, for the end of the projection or numbering will show the dodecatemorium of the planet. For example, if the dodecatemorium of the Sun is to be sought, which is in 8 degrees, 54 minutes of Leo, multiply 8 degrees, 54 minutes by 12, and 60 degrees, 48 minutes will be produced, that is, 3 signs, 16 degrees, 48 minutes, to which if you add 8 degrees, 54 minutes, it will become 3 signs, 25 degrees, 42 minutes. Now give the first sign to Gemini, the second to Cancer, the third to Leo, and finally the dodecatemorium of the Sun will reach 25 degrees, 42 minutes of Virgo. In this way, the Sun placed in 9 degrees, 53 minutes of Libra projects its dodecatemorium into 8 degrees, 26 minutes of Sagittarius. And from this follows the order or series of the nine parts. If you divide an entire sign into 9 parts, each ninth portion, as they call it, will have 3 degrees, 20 minutes. And these parts are divided among the planets in such a way that the lord of the movable sign of the same triplicity presides over the first ninth part; the lord of the sign immediately following the movable sign over the second; and so consequently according to the dominion of the planets in the signs and the natural series of those signs. For example, Mars dominates the first ninth part, for it belongs to the fiery trigon, as they call it, whose movable sign is Aries and its lord is Mars. The ruler of the second ninth part of Leo is Venus, because Taurus, whose ruler is Venus, immediately follows Aries in the order of the signs. The lord of Gemini presides over the third ninth part of Leo. The Moon is the ruler of the fourth. Jupiter is the lord of the fifth. Saturn is the lord of the sixth. Mars is the lord of the eighth. Jupiter is the lord of the ninth, and so on for the rest. Therefore, if in reading Arabic writings, sentences concerning the lord of Anaubarach, or the lord of the luminaries, occur, we are warned in this chapter that they are to be understood concerning the dominion of the ninth part of the heretical light. And from this, the following jurisdiction of the decanates, how much it differs from the decans proposed in the first difference, is quite clear from the example recited here. If the first part of Aries encircles the eastern horizon, then the lord of the ascendant sign will be its decan; and if the second decuria of the same Aries ascends, its decan will be the Sun, the lord of the fifth sign from Aries and the second in the same trigon. Finally, if the third decuria of Aries ascends, then Jupiter will be considered its decan. For Jupiter is the ninth sign from Aries, and the third in the same trigon. Similarly, it is easy to judge concerning the remaining signs. And from this, if at any time it is desired to constitute those whom they call the rulers of the orb, then through what has been taught above in the last chapter of the second difference, diligently inquire into the temporal hour of the nativity, and attribute the horoscope to the lord of that hour, and the first year of the nativity; for it is said to signify in that year the health or illness of the native's body and all other things which the lord of the ascendant is accustomed to bestow. The lord of the following hour will preside over the following year and house, and in the same year is thought to obtain equal power with the lord of the second house. In exactly the same way, you will order the lords of the hours and the succeeding celestial stations, until you reach the significator of the twelfth house. However, with the twelfth year completed, in the following 13th year of the native's life, the first house will revert to the lord of the 13th hour, from which it will proceed in the same manner up to the end of the 24th year according to the order of the houses and planets.

[Method of Horary Judgment]
The second part of the method is about the thing they name. Thus, above the fourth house, it constitutes the significator of the father, which is minimally consistent with Ptolemy's doctrine. And this principle of consideration is, as it were, the matter or subject of what we have proposed to inquire into. Secondly, it must be observed which stars have the power to exercise dominion in these places, according to those whom we mentioned in the first difference, in five ways. And if one star obtains all prerogatives in the place of the significator, and presides in all ways, we must confer upon it all dominion and jurisdiction for determining its outcome. How one star can preside over one place in all ways has been shown in the first difference. But if two or more preside, we will transfer the principal power of decision to those that excel in the number of votes, with the others having fewer prerogatives participating. Since one of the five modes of dominion is aspect or configuration, it is clear that the planet which is constituted in the very place of the question, or shines upon it with its ray, should by no means be neglected. These rulers of places, not without reason, obtain a similarity to the efficient cause. Thirdly, the quality of the thing sought must be inquired into, or, which is the same, the genus of the question must be distinguished by qualities. For example, the matter or genus of the question is riches. This is distinguished by qualities in this way: whether the riches will be in money, or lands, or gifts, or other merchandise, or finally, will be acquired by some other industry and ingenuity. But in order to conjecture what the outcome will be, it is necessary to consider both the natures of the lords themselves, by whose name, as I warned before, we understand at the same time the place and the lords mixed with their rays, and the idiosyncrasies of the signs, the ruling planets, and the principal places they contain. Here also observe that by the name of signs are understood both the asterisms of the eighth sphere and the dodecatemoria of the world. The fourth part of the method is concerning the magnitude of the effect, of which three states are usually described in the art, namely, the highest, the middle, and the lowest. But the intermediate states that fall between those extremes, since they are almost infinite and cannot be comprehended by precepts, pertain to the artful conjecture and sagacity of the learned mathematician. This quantity of effects or decrees is taken from the strength of the ruling stars, which, as we shall show more clearly, God willing, in the following difference, chapter on fortunate and unfortunate places, is gathered from four circumstances, namely, their own nature, their own rays, the places of the heavens in which they are fixed, and finally, their genesis by comparison. The last part of the method pertains to the universal knowledge of the time of the decree. Here two things are observed in the rulers: first, whether they are matutine or vespertine, and this is compared to the horoscope. Those in the quadrants and preceding the horoscope and opposite to them are called matutine; the rest and those following are called vespertine by Ptolemy, as has been explained above. Then it must also be seen whether they are placed in angles or in succedent places. For when they are matutine or constituted in angles, they exert their power more quickly; if vespertine or in succedent places, more slowly. This general method of conjecturing the times of decrees must be taken simply; for their exquisite and exact definition pertains to the directions and other particular progressions to be explained below. Hence, what follows in the text can also be understood, namely, that the occidental signifies extreme old age, but the oriental signifies the beginning of old age; this must be referred to the last part of this method, that is, to the conjecture about the time of future events. For this can be excused in some way if by oriental and occidental Saturn you understand matutine and vespertine; and this, as said before, compared both to the Sun and to the world. But it seems that the author here is not dealing with time, which is taken from the disposition of the significators to the Sun and the angles of the world, but rather understands the seven ages common to all men, each of which, due to a certain disposition, agrees with and is distributed among individual planets. If this is so, he appears to be mistaken in two ways here. First, because he distributes the ages to the wandering stars differently from Ptolemy and less properly, and less consistently with nature, which those who wish to compare this author's opinion on ages with Ptolemy's opinion, which we will soon discuss, and which the author himself will describe at the end of this Difference, will easily understand. Secondly, because he follows a common error in saying that Saturn signifies extreme old age if it is occidental, but the beginning of old age if it is oriental. As if it mattered for this matter whether planets are occidental or oriental, well or ill placed in the geniture, and therefore that congruent effects corresponding to the disposition of the stars attributed to those ages should be expected in each age. For those err who think that the first 4 years (for example) attributed to the Moon, will therefore be happier than the following ten years, to which Mercury is assigned, because the Moon was better affected from the beginning. Just as we have often noted that herbs, plants, trees, animals, stones, metals, parts of the body, and similar forms of things are attributed to certain stars mainly because of their temperament. So also ages, each of which is endowed with a peculiar nature, agree with certain stars especially because of the similarity of their temperaments. For example, that extreme and worn-out age, being cold, dry, earthy, sluggish, trembling, inept, sickly, fearful, and impeded by such evils as follow the temperament of Saturn, is therefore rightly ascribed to Saturn. But this is not because of Saturn's disposition in the geniture, but because of the dyscrasia of this age, which is common to all men. For it is not that this or that man has Saturn ill-disposed at his birth, but all others, to whom it shone favorably, experience a deficiency of natural moisture, in old age. But that some experience old age more mildly or more troublesomely than others, must be referred to other particular causes, namely, to the diverse effects of diverse stars, which, falling into that age, produce such intentions and remissions in the common nature of old age. For since universally the bodies of all old people are more afflicted by the Sun going through the equinoxes due to the consent of disposition in the surrounding air, and conversely are, as it were, recreated in May due to their very humid constitution: who can now doubt that in particular constitutions, those in whose genitures benefic stars are found to show their power in that age will experience a milder old age, even if Saturn was ill-affected at the time of birth. But old age will be utterly afflicted if malefic stars are to assume dominion in it, no matter how well Saturn is placed in the geniture. The same judgment must be made concerning the other ages, which are numbered by Ptolemy to seven, according to the number of wandering stars. Indeed, Ptolemy, at the end of the Quadripartite construction, establishes four divisions of human life in time. The first and most general is into 7 ages, which, as I said, are common to all men, and are distributed among the planets according to their natural order. For the first four complete years, in which excessive humidity, and therefore sudden growth, epilepsy, and instability of health are most prevalent in the body, while in the mind all things are at least nascent and uncorrected, are attributed to the Moon, to whose temperament all these things correspond. This first period is called the age of infancy. From the beginning of the fifth year to the end of the 14th, Mercury's age succeeds the Moon's, which is called the age of childhood. This begins to compose minds for understanding, to implant the seeds of disciplines, to reveal peculiar conditions of morals and studies, and finally to excite the first rudiments of arts. Afterwards, from 14 to the 22nd year, Venus presides, during which time the age of adolescence is comprehended. This begins to move the seminal passages, which first

[The Sun's Beneficence and Ptolemy's Classification]
Lastly, because it is sometimes hindered and cannot help us, when this happens, great evils usually befall those who, turning against it, call it malefic, which is truly undeserved, as no one is better by nature. For it prolongs life, and benignly bestows a healthy body, innate strength, and a sincere and unwavering mind. It confers royal dignities and honors. It presents us with abundant wealth. It is fitting to believe that this is the soul of the entire world, or more plainly, its mind; this is the principal governance and number of nature, estimating its works. For it provides light to things and removes darkness. It conceals the other stars and tempers the most pleasing changes of seasons and the perpetually regenerating year according to nature. It dispels celestial sadness and also brightens the human mind's fog. It lends its light to other stars as well, being brilliant, exceptional, seeing all things, and even hearing all things, as Homer, the prince of letters, pleased, in the Iliad: 'the sun, he says, as they know, shines upon others.' Nazianzen compares it to the divine mind with these words: 'What the sun is to the body, God is to the soul.' There are therefore, to sum up everything, two stars, namely Saturn and Mars, which are harmful; and three, namely Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon, which are beneficial; and finally two, namely the Sun and Mercury, which are of both natures. Finally, it is useful to note that the planets which our astrologers call fortunate, unfortunate, and of both natures, Ptolemy simply names 'benefic,' 'malefic,' and 'intermediate.' His words on this are: 'Since we have distinguished two of the genera and again, two of the nature and manners of each, the unequal of the good and great, and that concerning the nature of each, and the external great ones being diminished. For the planets Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon are simply benefic, and among the intermediate are the Sun and Mercury, as in those concerning the disposition of parents and those in the soul, and those concerning outcomes and things pertaining to matters simply in the planet. For each of them differs in the quality of generation, such as the Sun, Mercury, and Moon. (And each of the others...)

[Planetary Influence on Birth and Soul]
Simply put, it is a benefic, and among those between the Sun and Mercury, as in matters concerning the disposition of parents and those in the soul, and in matters concerning outcomes and those pertaining to affairs, simply on the planet. For each of them differs in the quality of birth, such as the Sun and Mercury, and the Moon. (And each of the other remaining ones is simply a benefic, and among those between the Sun and Mercury, as in matters concerning the disposition of parents and those in the soul, and in matters concerning outcomes and those pertaining to affairs, simply on the planet. For each of them differs in the quality of birth, such as the Sun and Mercury, and the Moon. (And each of the other remaining ones is simply a benefic, and among those between the Sun and Mercury, as in matters concerning the disposition of parents and those in the soul, and in matters concerning outcomes and those pertaining to affairs, simply on the planet. For each of them differs in the quality of birth, such as the Sun and Mercury, and the Moon.

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
But of the remaining planets, each differs in the quality of the nativity, such as the Sun and the Moon.

[Moon's Quality in Nativities]
The Moon. (Each of the other planets differs in the quality of its nativity, like the Sun and the Moon.)

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
They differ in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities, as do the Sun and Moon. (Each of the others differs in the quality of their nativities.

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
The Sun and Moon differ in the quality of their nativities. Each of the remaining planets also differs in the quality of their nativities, just like the Sun and Moon.

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of the nativity, like the Sun and the Moon.

[Moon and other planets]
Moon. (Each of the other planets differs in the quality of its generation, as do the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon's Influence on Nativities]
How the Sun and Moon differ. (Each of the other planets differs in the quality of the nativity as do the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon]
The Sun and the Moon. (Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of its generation, as do the Sun and the Moon.)

[Moon and Other Planets]
Moon. (Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of its generation, such as the Sun and Moon.)

[Sun and Moon in Nativities]
Each of the remaining planets differs in the quality of the nativity, such as the Sun and the Moon.